THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO THE PHILOSOPHIES OF PAINTING AND SCULPTURE
Comprising 45 chapters, written especially for this volume by an international team of leading experts, The Routledge Companion to the Philosophies of Painting and Sculpture is the first handbook of its kind. The editors have organized the chapters across eight broader sections:
I Artforms
II History
III Questions of form, style, and address
IV Art and science
V Comparisons among the arts
VI Questions of value
VII Philosophers of art
VIIIInstitutionalquestions
Individual topics include art and cognitive science, evolutionary origins of art, art and perception, pictorial realism, artistic taste, style, issues of race and gender, art and religion, art and philosophy, and the end of art. The work of selected philosophers is also discussed, including Diderot, Hegel, Ruskin, Gombrich, Goodman, Wollheim, and Danto. With an introduction from the editors and comprehensively indexed, The Routledge Companion to the Philosophies of Painting and Sculpture serves as a point of entry to the subject for a broad range of students as well as an up-to-date reference for scholars in the field.
Noël Carroll is Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at the Graduate Center, CUNY, the au-thor of 19 books, editor or coeditor of eight volumes, a former journalist, and the author of five documentaries.
Jonathan Gilmore is Professor of Philosophy at the Graduate Center and Baruch College, CUNY. He is coeditor of the Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. His most recent book is Apt Imaginings: Feelings for Fictions and Other Creatures of the Mind (2020), which was awarded the 2021 Outstanding Monograph Prize by the American Society for Aesthetics.
ROUTLEDGE PHILOSOPHY COMPANIONS
Routledge Philosophy Companions offer thorough, high quality surveys and assessments of the major
topics and periods in philosophy. Covering key problems, themes and thinkers, all entries are specially commissioned for each volume and written by leading scholars in the field. Clear, accessible
and carefully edited and organised, Routledge Philosophy Companions are indispensable for anyone
coming to a major topic or period in philosophy, as well as for the more advanced reader.
Also available:
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO FEMINIST PHILOSOPHY
Edited by Ann Garry, Serene J. Khader, and Alison Stone
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO PHILOSOPHY OF PSYCHOLOGY,
SECOND EDITION
Edited by Sarah Robins, John Symons, and Paco Calvo
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY
Edited by Richard Cross and JT Paasch
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO PHILOSOPHY OF PHYSICS
Edited by Eleanor Knox and Alastair Wilson
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS
Edited by Benjamin Hale, Andrew Light, and Lydia A. Lawhon
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO THE PHILOSOPHIES OF PAINTING
AND SCULPTURE
Edited by Noël Carroll and Jonathan Gilmore
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO PRAGMATISM
Edited by Scott F. Aikin and Robert B. Talisse
For more information about this series, please visit: https://www.routledge.com/Routledge-
Philosophy-Companions/book-series/PHILCOMP
THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION TO THE PHILOSOPHIES OF PAINTING AND SCULPTURE
Edited by Noël Carroll and Jonathan Gilmore
Designed cover image: Caravaggio, Bacchus (c. 1598), Gallerie degli Uffizi,First published 2023by Routledge605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 Taylor & FrancisThe right of Noël Carroll and Jonathan Gilmore to be identified as the authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-138-23381-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-32071-7 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-31272-7 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727
Typeset in Bemboby codeMantra
v
CONTENTS
Notes on Contributors x
Introduction 1Noël Carroll and Jonathan Gilmore
PART IArtforms 3
1 Philosophical Approaches to Painting 5Jonathan Gilmore
2 Sculpture 17David Davies
3 Printmaking: Impressions, Editions, and Reproductions 28Roy T. Cook
4 Erotic Art and the Nude 39Hans Maes
5 On Regarding Digital Art 49Shelby Moser
6 Performance Art 59David Davies
7 You Had to Be There: Installation as Art Form and Argument 69Karen Gover
Contents
vi
PART II
History 77 8 Antiquity 79
Nickolas Pappas 9 Ideas of Art in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance 94
Carole Talon- Hugon 10 What Was Fine Art? Painting and Sculpture Before and After
the Reign of the Fine Arts 103
Larry Shiner 11 Early Modern European Philosophy of Painting and Sculpture 111
J. Colin McQuillan 12 An Art History Made for and by Artists 121
David Carrier 13 End of Art and the Plastic Arts 130
Stephen Snyder 14 The Avant- Garde 140
Noël Carroll
PART III
Questions of Form, Style, and Address 147 15 Style 149
Frank Boardman 16 Pictorial Organization 157
Bence Nanay 17 Realism 167
Catharine Abell 18 Functional Art 176
Glenn Parsons
PART IV
Art and Science 183 19 Evolution and the Fine Arts 185
Tobyn De Marco
Contents
vii
20 Cognitive Psychology 196William P. Seeley
PART VComparisons among the Arts 207
21 Fine Arts of Display: Photography, Painting, Drawing 209Patrick Maynard
22 Philosophy of Photography Naturalized 219Scott Walden
23 Painting and Sculpture in Their Relation to Architecture 226CaroleTalon-Hugon
24 Painting and Theater 238Susan L. Feagin
25 Painterly Aspirations in Poetry 247John Gibson
26 Painting and Comics 257Henry John Pratt
27 The Medium ( Re) viewed: Returning to an Excursus on Painting, Film, and Photography 264Kristin Boyce
28 T heater Dance as a Complex Artform 276Renee M. Conroy
PART VIQuestions of Value 287
29 Religion 289Gordon Graham
30 “ Art Is How We Love Ourselves Now”: Race, Fine Art, and the Dignity of Criticism 299Paul C. Taylor
31 Philosophical Works of Art 309Thomas E. Wartenberg
Contents
viii
32 Pittura: A Gendered Template for Painting 322Peg Brand Weiser
33 Truth and Truthfulness in Painting 337John Hyman
PART VIIPhilosophers of Art
34 Diderot 357Jacques Morizot
35 Hegel on Sculpture and Painting 367Richard Eldridge
36 John Ruskin on Painting and Sculpture 380Paul Guyer
37 Nelson Goodman’s Theory of Expression and Exemplification: Problems and Halting Solutions 389John Bender
38 E. H. Gombrich 397William P. Seeley
39 Richard Wollheim 407Derek Matravers
40 Arthur Danto 417Noël Carroll
PART VIIIInstitutional Questions 423
41 Forgery and Authenticity 425Darren Hudson Hick
42 Museum as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror 435Curtis L. Carter
43 Conservation and Restoration 452Rafael De Clercq
Contents
ix
44 Space Is Place: Why the Placement of Sculpture Matters 460Jason Miller
45 Taste for Painting and Sculpture 470Stephanie Ross
Index 485
x
CONTRIBUTORS
Catharine Abell is Professor of Philosophy of Art at the University of Oxford. Her research addresses
issues at the intersection of the philosophy of art, philosophy of language, and philosophy
of mind.
John Bender was Professor of Philosophy at Ohio University and a widely exhibited painter. His
research included significant contributions to epistemology, metaphysics, and the philosophy of art.
Kristin Boyce is Associate Professor of Philosophy and Faculty Fellow in the Shackouls Honors
College at Mississippi State University. She has been an ACLS New Faculty Fellow at the Johns
Hopkins Humanities Center and a resident fellow at the NYU Center for Ballet and the Arts.
She is currently working on a manuscript, Diotima at the Ballet: The Place of Love in Philosophy and
the Arts.
Frank Boardman is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Worcester State University. He tends to
write articles about art and books about logic.
Curtis L. Carter is Schuenke Chair Professor of Aesthetics, Marquette University Philosophy
Department. His recent publications include Border crossings: Aesthetics into the Arts (2017); Aesthetics
and Everyday Life, coeditor, (2015); Unsettled Boundaries: Philosophy, Art and Ethics East and West,
editor, (2017); and Aesthetics of Everyday Life East/West, coeditor (2014).
David Carrier taught philosophy in Pittsburgh and art history in Cleveland. He published books
on the museum, the criticism of Charles Baudelaire, Nicolas Poussin’s paintings, Sean Scully, and
world art history. He writes art criticism for Brooklyn Rail and Hyperallergic.
Noël Carroll teaches philosophy at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York and
is the author most recently of Humour: A Very Short Introduction and Classics in the Western Philosophy
of Art.
Renee M. Conroy is an independent researcher and Fulbright Scholar. Formerly Associate Professor
of Philosophy at Purdue University Northwest, she has published extensively on issues in
the philosophy of dance, the performing arts, and environmental aesthetics.
xi
Notes on Contributors
Roy T. Cook is CLA Scholar of the College, Setterberg Fellow of Philosophy, and Professor at the University of Minnesota—Twin Cities. He works on the philosophy of mathematics, philo-sophical and mathematical logic, and aesthetics.
David Davies is Professor of Philosophy at McGill University. He works primarily in Philosophy of Art, and on philosophical issues arising in specific artforms. His books include Art as Performance (2004), Aesthetics and Literature (2007), Philosophy of the Performing Arts (2011), and The Ontology of Multiple Artworks (forthcoming).
Rafael De Clercq is Associate Professor in the Department of Philosophy at Lingnan University, Hong Kong. He has published articles and book chapters on a variety of topics in aesthetics and metaphysics, including aesthetic properties, art restoration, and criteria of identity.
Tobyn De Marco is Professor of Philosophy at Bergen Community College in New Jersey, USA. He earned his PhD at The Graduate Center, City University of New York. His research interests are in aesthetics, philosophy of music, and the philosophy of biology.
Richard Eldridge, Charles and Harriett Cox McDowell Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at Swarthmore College, lectures now at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. His most recent books are Werner Herzog: Filmmaker and Philosopher and Images of History: Kant, Benjamin, Freedom, and the Human Subject.
Susan L. Feagin is Visiting Research Professor of Philosophy, retired, at Temple University, and taught at the University of Missouri-Kansas City 1977–2003. She is a former president of the American Society for Aesthetics, and former editor of The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. She currently writes on philosophy of theater.
John Gibson is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Louisville. He has published on met-aphor, the nature of fiction, and the ethical and cognitive value of art. He is currently completing a book on poetry, meaning, and self-expression.
Jonathan Gilmore is Professor of Philosophy at the Graduate Center, CUNY, an art critic, and coeditor of The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. His most recent book is Apt Imaginings: Feel-ings for Fictions and Other Creatures of the Mind (2020), which was awarded the 2021 Outstanding Monograph Prize by the American Society for Aesthetics.
Karen Gover is a philosopher of art and aesthetics. She taught philosophy for fifteen years at Bennington College, with visiting appointments at Columbia University and the School of Visual Arts in New York. She left academia to become an attorney specializing in intellectual property law, and is a member of Harvard Law School’s JD class of 2023. Her book Art and Au-thority: Moral Rights and Meaning in Contemporary Visual Art was published in 2018.
Gordon Graham is Chair of the Edinburgh Sacred Arts Foundation and Emeritus Professor of Philosophy and the Arts at Princeton Theological Seminary. His many publications include Phi-losophy, Art and Religion: Understanding Faith and Creativity (2017).
Paul Guyer is Jonathan Nelson Professor of Humanities and Philosophy emeritus at Brown Uni-versity. He is the author, editor, and translator of numerous books by or on Immanuel Kant,
xii
Notes on Contributors
including Kant and the Claims of Taste, Kant and the Experience of Freedom, and Values of Beauty. He
is also the author of A History of Modern Aesthetics in three volumes (2014), Experience and Reason in
Kant and Mendelssohn (2020), and A Philosopher Looks at Architecture (2021).
Darren Hudson Hick is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Furman University. His research
focuses on philosophical problems of intellectual property and related issues in the overlap of art,
authorship, and ownership. He is author of Artistic License (2017).
John Hyman is Grote Chair in the Philosophy of Mind and Logic at University College, University
of London. His main research interests are in epistemology and metaphysics, philosophy
of mind and action, philosophy of art, and the philosophy of Wittgenstein. His most recent book
is Action, Knowledge, and Will.
Hans Maes is Senior Lecturer in History and Philosophy of Art at the University of Kent. He is
author of Conversations on Art and Aesthetics (2017) and editor of Portraits and Philosophy (2020) and
Pornographic Art and the Aesthetics of Pornography (2013).
Derek Matravers is Professor of Philosophy at The Open University and Fellow of Churchill
College, Cambridge. He writes in aesthetics, ethics, and the philosophy of mind, and edits, with
Paloma Atencia-Linares, The British Journal of Aesthetics.
Patrick Maynard, Emeritus Professor of Philosophy, University of Western Ontario; Visiting
Professor, Universities of Michigan, Ann Arbor; California, Berkeley; Simon Fraser; and Visiting
Scientist, University of Cagliari, Sardinia, is the author of two original treatises and many papers,
and has lectured and organized conferences internationally.
J. Colin McQuillan is Professor of Philosophy at St. Mary’s University in San Antonio, TX.
He is author of Early Modern Aesthetics (2015) and editor of Baumgarten’s Aesthetics: Historical and
Philosophical Perspectives (2021).
Jason Miller is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Warren Wilson College in Asheville, North
Carolina. He writes about the relationship between art and politics, and is the author of The Politics
of Perception and the Aesthetics of Social Change (2021).
Jacques Morizot is Honorary Professor of Philosophy and Aesthetics at Aix-Marseille University.
His main area of research is the functioning of iconic objects at semiotic, perceptive, and
cognitive levels. He has also translated Goodman, Gombrich, Sibley, and Nanay.
Shelby Moser (she/her) is Senior Adjunct Professor at Azusa Pacific University where she teaches
Games & Interactive Media, Art History, and Philosophy and she’s a part time faculty member at
Rio Hondo College in the Art and Cultural Programs Department. Shelby’s interests primarily
focus on the philosophy of interactive art, video games, and role-playing games. She earned a
doctorate from the University of Kent (UK) in the History and Philosophy of Art.
Bence Nanay is Professor of Philosophy and BOF Research Professor at the University of
Antwerp. He has published four monographs (Between Perception and Action, 2013, Aesthetics as
Philosophy of Perception, 2016, Aesthetics: A Very Short Introduction, 2019, Mental Imagery, 2023) and
has several more under contract.
xiii
Notes on Contributors
Nickolas Pappas is Professor of Philosophy at the City University of New York. His books include The Routledge Philosophical Guidebook to Plato’s Republic; Politics and Philosophy in Plato’s Me-nexenus (with Mark Zelcer); and recently Plato’s Exceptional City, Love, and Philosopher.
Glenn Parsons is Professor of Philosophy at Toronto Metropolitan University where he teaches aesthetics and the philosophy of science. His books include Functional Beauty (with Allen Carlson) and The Philosophy of Design.
Henry John Pratt is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Marist College. His research is focused on popular art forms such as comics and film as well as general issues about artistic value, narrative, and beards.
Stephanie Ross is Professor Emerita of Philosophy at the University of Missouri-St. Louis. She is author of What Gardens Mean (1998), Two Thumbs Up: How Critics Aid Appreciation (2020), and chapters and papers on a variety of topics in aesthetics including caricature, allusion, Charles Le Brun on painting the passions, landscape appreciation, and community gardens.
William P. Seeley, PhD, teaches philosophy at the University of Southern Maine and the Uni-versity of New Hampshire—Manchester. He is also a sculptor. His work has been exhibited in New York City and at a number of university galleries.
Larry Shiner is Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at the University of Illinois Springfield. His books include The Invention of Art: A Cultural History (2001) and Art Scents: Exploring the Aesthetics of Smell and the Olfactory Arts (2020).
Stephen Snyder is affiliated with Boğaziçi University as Visiting Assistant Professor. His re-search interests include the philosophy of art, political philosophy, and how cultural transforma-tions relate to art. Recent publications include The End of Art Philosophy in Hegel, Nietzsche and Danto and New Perspectives on Distributive Justice.
Carole Talon-Hugon is Professor of Philosophy at Sorbonne University (Paris), and honorary member of the Institut Universitaire de France. She is the president of the French Society of Aes-thetics, and is the publication director of the Nouvelle Revue d’Esthétique.
Paul C. Taylor is W. Alton Jones Professor of Philosophy at Vanderbilt University. He received his undergraduate training at Morehouse College and his graduate training at the Kennedy School of Government and at Rutgers University. His research focuses primarily on social philos-ophy, critical race theory, American philosophy, and Africana philosophy. His books include On Obama and Black Is Beautiful: A Philosophy of Black Aesthetics, which received the 2017 Outstanding Monograph Prize from the American Society for Aesthetics.
Scott Walden has published on photography and film in The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism and The British Journal of Aesthetics. These philosophical interests inform his photographic practice, which is recognized by multiple grants from the Canada Council for the Arts, and the 2007 Duke and Duchess of York Prize in Photography. He is Professor of Philosophy at Nassau Community College.
Thomas E. Wartenberg is Professor of Philosophy Emeritus at Mount Holyoke College. Among his publications are Unlikely Couples: Movie Romance as Social Criticism, Thinking on Screen:
xiv
Notes on Contributors
Film as Philosophy, Thinking Through Stories: Children, Philosophy, and Picture Books, Mel Bochner:
Illustrating Philosophy and Thoughtful Images: Illustrating Philosophy Through Art.
Peg Brand Weiser painter and printmaker, is Laureate Professor of Philosophy at the University
of Arizona and Emerita Associate Professor of Philosophy and Gender/Women’s Studies at Indiana
University. She is editor of Beauty Matters (2000), Beauty Unlimited (2013), and Camus’s The
Plague: Philosophical Perspectives (2023).
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-1 1
INTRODUCTION
Noël Carroll and Jonathan Gilmore
The oldest extant examples of what we call art are prehistoric works of painting and sculpture, such as the cave paintings of Lascaux and statuette of the Venus of Willendorf. Although we can-not be certain of the fi ne- grained meanings that these objects held for their creators, we can infer to some degree their general communicative intent, since their representational content addresses us across the ages. As human history advanced, these arts continued to play a role, participating in the conversations of the cultures in which they emerged nearly universally and expressing the religious, ethical, and even metaphysical commitments of the societies they helped bring into existence.
This history has been long and complicated, as the visual arts mutated into a range of artforms, especially in the 20th century. Thus, we begin this anthology with a section devoted to a cata-logue of some of these many permutations. Although the title of this companion refers to only two kinds of artforms, it addresses the larger domain of those fine arts that were once called the “ plastic arts,”: the kinds of art in the creation of which the aims, materials, and methods of paint-ing and sculpture have played a central role. The companion also addresses movements, practices, and theoretical projects in the arts that defined themselves by contrast with h ow— historically and conceptually— the fine arts have been identified.
As the history of the visual arts is complex, in the second section, we present surveys of ( selective) episodes in the development of Western art, including antiquity, the middle ages, the renaissance, and the modern period, along with discussions of contemporary art.
Not only is the history of visual art complex; so are the concepts we use to describe, ex-plain, and understand it. Thus, we have canvased such concepts as style, realism ( in the sense of representation), the a vant- garde, functional art, pictorial organization, and philosophical art. Moreover, the visual arts have also recently become objects of scientific scrutiny both in terms of the cognitive/ perceptual operations they engage and the challenges they present to evolutionary psychology. For that reason, we have included a section on c utting- e dge research into the visual arts in the cognitive and affective sciences.
One way to better understand a given phenomenon is to contrast it with its near neighbors. Thus, we present a section of substantial comparisons between painting, photography, comics, printmaking, dance, theater, and architecture.
Art, as already mentioned, has perennially played an integral role in the dissemination and reinforcement of v alues— both for good and for ill. This is perhaps most obvious in its recurring partnership with religious practice. In our section on art and value, we have included an overview, not only of art in relation to religion, but of its intersection with questions of race, gender, and
Noël Carroll and Jonathan Gilmore
2
eros. Finally, along with an account of the value of authenticity in relation to forgeries, we include
an account of the relevance of truthfulness to a rt- appreciative discourse.
Though not as vast as the history of art, the history of the philosophy of art is also long lived.
So, starting in the modern period, we review a number of our distinguished forebears, including
Diderot, Hegel, Ruskin, Gombrich, Goodman, Wollheim, and Danto.
We conclude with a section on art institutions and audiences, including discussions of the museum
and the issues involved in the restoration and preservation of art, the placement of sculpture
in exhibitions, and, finally, the concept of taste as it applies to an audience’s response to painting
and sculpture.
Perhaps needless to say, the entries presented here cover only a small part of the territory identified
with the philosophy of painting, sculpture, and the vast variety of arts that have found an
impetus in relation to those earlier artforms. In that respect, this anthology is only a companion
for part of the way forward. But, it is hoped that it has introduced enough of a sense of the terrain
that one can continue reliably on one’s exploratory journey alone.
PART I
Artforms

DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-3 5
1PHILOSOPHICAL APPROACHES TO PAINTING
Jonathan Gilmore
1 Definition
We are concerned here not with all kinds of painting, but only with the works produced by what, following Richard Wollheim ( 1987), we will call painting as an art. So central to our discussion are works of such overlapping kinds as frescoes, encaustics, altarpiece panels, landscapes, portraits, still- l ifes, depictions of historical events, and abstractions. We might also extend the concept with qualifications to more peripheral kinds of paintings, inter alia: those created in novel or idiosyn-cratic media, such as Chuck Close’s portraits composed with small paper disks and Andy Warhol’s Oxidation canvases created with urine and copper- based paints; works whose conditions of cre-ation are essential to what they convey, such as street art; and objects that result from equipping non- h uman animals or machines with tools and materials of fine art. Whether or not the creative mechanisms, and conceptual and performative aims, of such works count against their status as paintings is a question a proper understanding of the core concept of painting should help illumi-nate. In any case, in what follows, reference to painting will be assumed to include the qualifica-tion “ as an art” except where indicated.
The extraordinary variety of instances, contemporary and historical, of painting would seem to render futile any attempt to find an essence to the art form, or a definition adumbrating neces-sary and jointly sufficient conditions under which an object is a painting. However, some struc-ture might be given to the concept when it is construed as referring to a cluster of individually weighted properties. No single one of these considerations would be dispositive in answering the question of a given artifact, “ is this a painting?” But the presence or absence of such properties would help to explain not just why core cases seem prototypical of paintings, but why there is reasonable disagreement or uncertainty about the identification of those on the periphery. A n on- exhaustive list of such properties whose possession would tend, perhaps with different weights, toward the identification of an object as a painting includes being:
• A visual product of intentional activity
• An artifact that endures beyond a viewer’s experience of it
• A visual representation that is most naturally seen via its vertical and horizontal axes being perpendicular to a spectator’s line of vision
• A surface composed of discrete marks so as to realize a cumulative visual effect
• A surface covered in a viscous medium, such as oil paint, tempera, gouache, or acrylic, the recognition of which as such is of artistic or aesthetic interest
Jonathan Gilmore
6
• A depiction that permits its content to be recognized in a configuration of lines, shapes, and
colors
• A work of art
• An artifact created in light of and with reference to other artifacts identified as paintings and
• A marked surface that serves as a conduit via which “ the mental state of an artist makes itself
felt within the mind of a spectator…” ( Wollheim, 1987: 22).
Not only might there be many other properties, the possession of which would point toward
something being a painting, but some properties might count against an object’s inclusion. For example,
some theories of forgeries question whether they are works of art or even paintings aspiring
to be art, rather than merely objects designed to give viewers a false experience of being such ( see
Hick, “ Forgery and Authenticity,” this volume). In this way of thinking, forgeries are no more
what they purport to be than a visualization of a mountain provided by a virtual reality headset
is a real mountain. Furthermore, even the most widely shared properties on that list admit exceptions
of b ona- fi de paintings. Most paintings are appropriately viewed h ead- on, with a picture
plane perpendicular to a spectator’s line of vision, but anamorphic paintings such as Holbein’s The
Ambassadors require a sideway point of view for their content to be revealed, and Michelangelo’s
fresco on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel ceiling has been described as resolving into a coherent
image only when seen from a position that foreshortens otherwise disproportionately large figures
(Steinberg, 2019).
Finally, some works are both paintings and art but may not exemplify painting as an art. For
example, Sol LeWitt’s Red Square, White Letters of 1963, a conceptual critique of the visual autonomy
attributed to l ate- m odernist painting, is indeed painted in oil on canvas but asks for its
content to be read off of its colored and shaped textual labels, not its visual presentation. Lucio
Fontana’s brightly painted slashed canvases (Cuts) of the late 1950s and 1960s are aesthetically
and artistically compelling but may only incidentally belong to the genre whose conventions the
works aim to critique.
As we will see, historical and contemporary theories of painting have typically seized on one
or more salient property of works in the genre and defended that or those properties as central to
the concept, often at the expense of diminishing other properties that would be salient in different
contexts. With few exceptions, such theories do not merely describe or define paintings but
seek to advance a view of what makes them artistically or aesthetically valuable. In some cases,
these theories, although purporting to address the nature of painting generally, are introduced
with the more specific aim of vindicating critical judgments of a given style, movement, or artist’s
work, particularly those that challenge heretofore conventions of the practice. Thus Roger Fry,
seeking to defend his judgment of the new style that he found in such diverse artists as Van Gogh,
Gauguin, and Cézanne, argued that the highest value of modern art was to be found in its aim
through formal means to express and arouse the emotions, not in its recording of the visual aspects
of nature–a project he attributed to the Impressionists and which he claimed “ had been pushed to
the point where further development was impossible.” Although none of these theories survives
philosophical scrutiny, considering them is instructive for understanding the nature and artistic
value of their respectively privileged property, even if we withhold commitment to its essentialist
role. Here we will also discuss aspects of paintings that are sometimes identified as explaining the
nature of paintings, even if playing that role is not characterized as essential.
2 Representational vs. Configurational Dimensions
Most paintings involve the representation of something via marks on a two- dimensional surface.
Abstract paintings are not, in virtue of their abstraction, excluded from this group. For just as a
Philosophical
Approaches to Painting
7
figurative painting might represent a landscape, so an abstract painting might represent a mood
or an idea. What distinguishes figurative from abstract is more specifically that abstract paintings,
although sometimes representational, are not depictive— t hey don’t offer an experience as if of the
visual properties of what they represent. More specifically, qua abstraction they don’t offer that
experience ( i.e., an abstract painting of fire might not be abstract with respect to its use of the hues
of red and black). Sometimes this is because what they represent has no visual property, as in the
case of abstract ideas. Other times, an abstract painting is presented so as to elicit an aesthetic interest
in its formal qualities— t he appearance and relations among its shapes, colors, lines, how its
elements are arranged, and its decorative q ualities— w ithout an attribution of content or meaning
to those marks. And, finally, an abstraction may represent a nonperceptual feature of a perceptible
thing, such as a portrait sitter’s institutional status or emotional fragility. We may, for example,
need to infer such contents of the representation from what is indeed visually represented, or be
elicited to attribute such nonperceptual contents to the representation through its arousal of the
relevant feelings in viewers.
Let us focus for the moment only on paintings understood as visual representations of their objects
( as opposed to symbolic or expressive representations). They can be characterized under two
kinds of descriptions. Under one description, we refer to a painting’s configurational dimensions:
the design and arrangement of its marks, colors, shapes, and other features of its literal surface.
Under the other description, we refer to the painting’s representational dimensions: the object of
which it presents a visual experience ( where this object is something other than an element of the
configurational properties that we literally see). So, under the first description we can refer to the
lines, brushstrokes, shapes, and colors of Caravaggio’s c.1596 Bacchus; under the second description,
we can refer to the boy dressed as the god, the grapes and wine leaves in his hair, and the
goblet he holds. Registering the appearance of the painting under both descriptions, we can then
attribute certain other symbolic and expressive properties to its content, such as that it presents us
with a n on- idealized human form ( the boy’s fingernails are dirty and there is a hint of stubble on
his cheek) and that it perhaps refers to an actual human model, Caravaggio’s pupil or assistant, not
the deity of which he bears the accoutrements.
Although the terms have been employed in many ways, we will refer here, by stipulation, to
theories that attend to the first kind of dimensions as a source of painting’s distinctiveness and
value as formal accounts and refer to theories that attend to the second kind of dimensions as mimetic
accounts. Although the difference between these kinds of accounts may lie merely in what kinds
of properties each seeks to emphasize or explain, the accounts have often been articulated as exclusive
rivals. So we will first discuss each approach separately and then turn to theories that seek
to show how the nature and value of painting can be understood only through attending to the
joint contribution of what those two accounts treat as exclusive foci. Yet we will also see the inadequacy
of speaking of the nature and value of paintings exclusively in terms of what they depict
and the formal means by which that depiction is achieved. For that we will need to consider how
the medium or material, as such, of a painting may sometimes contribute to its contents and effects.
3 Mimetic Accounts of Painting
Individually or as a class, paintings may have many sorts of values, inter alia, historical, cognitive,
religious, monetary, status- signaling, and functional values. These and other values could in many
circumstances be realized in other art forms and in artifacts that are not identified as art ( see Parsons,
“ Functional Art,” this volume).
Theories that attribute a distinctive value to painting thus try to show that it has some capacity
for the realization of value that other art forms and artifacts do not. The natural candidates for
such a capacity are found in the visual experience that painting affords. The thought here is that
Jonathan Gilmore
8
there is something unique or at least especially effective in that visual experience through which a painting realizes certain values, perhaps, including such values as those cited above. Where such theories differ is in how they characterize that experience and the means by which it is produced.
Mimetic accounts of painting see that experience as primarily constituted by our perception of a certain kind of content: the visual properties of the object, scene, state of affairs, and so on, that the painting represents. Such theories acknowledge that a painting may engage in several differ-ent kinds of representation. A painting may represent ( to borrow language from Saussure, 1983) something indexically, as footprints do. We see this in how Robert Ryman’s canvases composed of repeated and parallel brushstrokes instantiate physical traces of the movement of his hand as he applied them; and in how Jackson Pollock’s works register the gestures he employed as he poured and dripped paint onto canvas. Other paintings represent symbolically, via conventions, as the bird in Raphael’s Madonna of the Goldfinch represents the Passion. Yet those forms of representation don’t reflect what makes painting a specifically visual art. For tactile information could tell us in-formation about the movement of an artist’s hand in creating a work, and symbolic descriptions are employed in verbal art forms as well. Thus, the mimetic account seeks to ground its answer to what is distinctive and valuable in painting in some dimension of how paintings communicate their contents in the first instance via visual representation. Here, what matters is how an artist’s gesture is presented visually, whether or not the visual representation is genuinely caused by the movement it seems to be a trace of, and how a symbol is itself visually depicted, e.g., how the bird in Raphael’s Madonna of the Goldfinch is painted such that it can serve as a reminder to audiences literate in such symbols of Jesus’ later suffering.
One version of the mimetic theory holds that the visual experience paintings offer is one of an actual object— w here, that is, what a painting allows us to see is what we would see if we could confront the object face- to- face. But that account is too crude, not only because paintings often offer a visual experience of something that doesn’t exist but also because paintings show us their subjects represented in ways that may or may not correspond to how those subjects look in the flesh.
A more sophisticated version of the mimetic theory recognizes that paintings do not represent their subjects “ transparently.” Rather, paintings offer us a visual experience as if it were of their subjects, without that visual experience necessarily aspiring to conform to what a visual experi-ence would in fact be of the subject encountered extra- pictorially. Thus, a painting of a beautiful movie star—like De Kooning’s Marilyn Monroe ( 1954)— c an represent her as grotesque; a painting of a populated industrialized c ountryside— like Impressionist landscapes that edit out the evidence of the railroad— can represent it as pristine and pastoral. And Caravaggio’s Bacchus can represent his model as the god of wine, or as a young man just past the flush of youth dressing up as the mythological character. Here, the value of the visual experience a painting offers is to be found in the value of the visual experience of the painting’s c ontent— the object or scene as it is represented by the painting.
The mimetic account of painting has a long pedigree and gains a prima facie support from histories of the arts ( at least those of Western Art) that purport to trace a progressive mastery of techniques by which visual aspects of the experience of real things can be registered in a repre-sentation. We can see intimations of such a historical account in Vasari’s 1550 narrative of the progress of painting from Giotto through Michelangelo, “ the end and perfection of art” and in the ( perhaps apocryphal) anecdote told about the academic history painter Paul Delaroche who, upon seeing a daguerreotype in 1839, exclaimed “ from today, painting is dead” ( Bann, 1997).
How paintings depict their objects so as to give us an experience as if it were of those objects has historically been answered through a particular theory of depiction that we can call illusionism. ( We will see in a moment not only why that theory is unsatisfactory as a theory of depiction but also why mimetic approaches need not be saddled with a commitment to illusionism.) The idea
Philosophical
Approaches to Painting
9
that paintings fool viewers into thinking they actually stand before the subjects the paintings depict
is most dramatically illustrated in the Roman writer Pliny’s narrative of the contest between
Zeuxis and Parrhasius over who is the greater painter ( see Pappas, “ Antiquity,” this volume).
There, Zeuxis presents a painting of grapes that is so realistic that the birds descend from the trees
to peck at the panel. Yet, when he asks Parrhasius to remove drapery covering his painting, the
latter reveals that his creation is only a depiction of drapery. Whereas the one contestant succeeds
in causing mere birds to confuse a painting with what it depicts, the other triumphs by fooling
a celebrated artist. Plato presents a similar but much dimmer view of how painting works in the
Republic:
a painter, we say, will paint us a cobbler, a carpenter, and other craftsmen, though he himself
has no expertness in any of these arts. But, nevertheless, if he were a good painter, by exhibiting
at a distance his picture of a carpenter he would deceive children and foolish men, and
make them believe it to be a real carpenter.
(598b–c)
Finally, in Art and Illusion, Ernst Gombrich offers a comparable theory that paintings depict their
objects through aiming to cause an experience like that of the object being present before the
viewer ( see Seeley, “E .H. Gombrich,” this volume). However, Gombrich doesn’t suggest, like
Plato, that such illusionism causes viewers to form the false belief that a painting is actually what
it depicts. That would be a theory of painting as prompting delusion, which outside of invented
stories, is rarely instantiated in our encounters with works of art. There is some controversy over
whether Gombrich’s analysis of depiction is committed to paintings actually achieving such illusionism,
but a plausible interpretation of his theory is that for a picture to depict some content X is
for the picture to be composed in such a way that it tends to cause audiences to have an experience
as if they are viewing X itself. Such illusionistic accounts of depiction have been heavily criticized,
principally on the grounds that, outside of genres such as trompe l’oeil, we rarely experience what
a painting depicts as if it were there in the flesh. We do not even experience, say, a tendency that
is overridden by our recognition that we stand before a representation, to see paintings this way.
However, the failure of illusionism as a theory of depiction hardly undermines the mimetic
theories of painting. Indeed, a proponent of such a theory may appeal to a number of other highly
developed, if rival, theories of how paintings depict their contents. ( For a full discussion of such
theories, see Hyman, and Bantinaki, 2021.)
One alternative theory of depiction appeals to the notion of visual recognition. In this account,
developed in Schier ( 1986) and Lopes ( 1996), we recognize the things pictures depict via the same
mental capacities we employ in recognizing those things outside of pictorial contexts. Here, for a
picture to visually represent X is for us to recognize X in the picture just as we would an actual X,
not for us to necessarily have the experience we would of X in the flesh. A painting depicts, e.g.,
a bridge insofar as we can recognize a bridge in the painting using the same capacities involved
in seeing a real bridge.
A second alternative is the theory that a painting depicts some extra- pictorial thing insofar as
viewers experience a resemblance in certain respects between the painting’s surface and that thing.
Thus, for Robert Hopkins ( 1998) and Catharine Abell ( 2007), who have each developed resemblance
theories of depiction, a painting depicts, say, a bridge through affording an experience of
its surface as resembling in certain respects a bridge. One of the more important respects identified
here is an object’s outline shape: something O is seen in a surface P iff P is experienced as resembling
O in outline shape ( Hopkins: 77).
A third kind of theory, conventionalism, dispenses with notions of perceptual resemblance
between a painting’s surface and what it depicts. Instead, conventionalist theories ( such as that
Jonathan
Gilmore
10
introduced by Nelson Goodman [1968] and developed by John Kulvicki [2006b]) treat pictorial depiction as a function of the role a symbol plays in a certain system.
Goodman thus argues that a picture does not visually represent something by providing a mi-metic appearance or resemblance to it. Rather, a painting of X visually represents x in virtue of the semantic and syntactic conventions that constitute the symbol system to which the painting of X belongs ( 1968: 42). Such a system ( Goodman refers to “ the traditional Western system of representation” [1968: 226] as an example) is made up of rules that associate symbols with certain denotata. So just as the noun “ boot” refers to a boat in German but a boot in English, a “ Blue Nude” painting might represent a woman with an ordinary appearance in a system associated with a Fauvist style or one with an unusual complexion in a system associated with a realist style. Here, depictions of the sort addressed by perceptual and resemblance theories are construed as just as arbitrarily related to what they depict as linguistic descriptions are to what they represent.
While the conventionalist approach has been found to be much more controversial than rec-ognition or resemblance views, it is important to note that none of these theories limits itself to explaining just painterly depiction; in principle, they aspire to explain depiction across many different domains, including that found in photographs, diagrams, and maps. Thus, worries over a theory such as conventionalism when it is restricted to painting may be compensated for by a strength in the theory’s general applicability over many kinds of depiction beyond painting.
Even when a mimetic theory does not explicitly identify a commitment to one of the above explanations of depiction, it must offer some account of what specifically it is in the experience of a painting’s depicted contents that can supply painting’s distinctive value.
In some cases, that value might be identical to the value of experiencing a painting’s object in the flesh. Prior to the invention of photography, paintings were one means by which people could experience what were presented as realistic depictions of such things as foreign locales, his-torical events, deceased relatives, and for the aristocracy, even marriage prospects. However, that documentary function cannot of course be the only source of painting’s value. For if the value of paintings is found in the appearance of something that, in principle, we might confront directly, unmediated by a representation, it is hard to explain why we often savor the visual experience of a painting of a landscape more than seeing that part of nature in person.
Relatedly, we often take pleasure in seeing things depicted in paintings that we would suffer from seeing for real. Aristotle puzzled over that latter phenomenon, suggesting in the Poetics that “ we enjoy looking at the most exact portrayals of things whose actual sight is painful to us” ( he refers to pictures of corpses as an example) because of the pleasure we take in acquiring knowledge of those things ( Aristotle, 1987). Even if this is true of the first occasion, it isn’t clear that such compensation is available upon subsequent viewings of the same image, in relation to which the putative knowledge has already been acquired. Also, we need an explanation of why, when paint-ings depict things that could just as easily be represented via photography, we do not necessarily value the latter experience over the former.
Finally, while viewers of a painting might take pleasure in its success in depicting a t hree- dimensional reality on a two- d imensional surface— t hat is, just its being an achievement of a visual representation— this can be only a partial answer to what is distinctive of value in painting. For that kind of value attaches to any successful painterly depiction, irrespective of what content it makes available to viewers. An explanation of what makes the experience of a painting valuable should, by contrast, recognize some role played by the specific properties of its contents, not merely that any given contents are represented. Whereas the defect there is to find value only in a representation qua representational vehicle, without regard to the specific contents represented, a contrary defect attends 17th and 18th century academic theories committed to the hierarchy of genres. There, a painting that portrayed a historical event or monarch would, by virtue merely of that subject, be attributed a higher value than one that depicted a domestic scene or arrangement
Philosophical Approaches to Painting
11
of flowers ( see Wrigley, 1993). That is, these theories located the value of paintings in their extrapictorial
subjects themselves, not in the s ubjects- as- represented by the paintings.
More illuminating versions of the mimetic approach to painting identify, not the value of the
visual experience of the bare subjects that paintings present, but what is special about painting’s visual
content across many different kinds of subjects. Such theories aim to tell us what is distinctive
in painting’s specifically visual mode of representing things. Renaissance defenders of painting
in the paragone, or contest of the arts, thus typically pointed to what they claimed painting could
show or achieve that sculpture, poetry, and, by extension, other arts could not, such as the color
and texture of things, or how all elements of some state of affairs look at the same time ( sculpture,
by contrast, requires one to shift one’s position to take in all that it represents). For other theorists,
such as Lessing, the capacity to represent a certain kind of beauty is painting’s essential function
( Lessing, 1766/ 1962). For later theorists, such as Ruskin ( 1906), paintings serve as visual prosthetics:
showing us more of what can be seen in what we see. And artists as varied as Chardin,
Cezanne, and modernist Photorealists have been interpreted as engaging in the representation of
objects not for their visual properties alone but in order to convey some t hesis— o nly conveyable
through painting— about the nature of vision and representation itself ( Gilmore, 2005).
4 Formalist Theories of Painting
Of course, a theory of painting that focused solely on the genre’s represented contents would ignore
a fundamental feature of such w orks— t hat they are representations in paint. In other words,
a theory of painting ought to explain our interest in, and the capacities for representation afforded
by, such painterly resources as lines, shapes, contours, brushstrokes, hues, glazes, scumble, granulation,
washes, and textures of the canvas, linen, plaster, or wood support. A staunch defender
of the mimetic account might argue that all such painterly means are of interest solely for their
contribution to a painting’s capacity to present a visual experience as being of what it depicts.
But as noted above, this would fail to explain why the visual experience a painting provides of a
subject- as- represented can have aesthetic or artistic values that, say, a photograph of, sculpture of,
or actual encounter with, the subject does not. Often a representation of something is of greater
aesthetic interest to us than a visual experience of the actual thing itself. Other theories thus focus
on aspects of painting whose artistic and aesthetic value is not exhausted in their contribution to
the presentation of the depicted object. Emphasis on the distinctiveness and value of such configurational
aspects of painting in the history and criticism of art is associated with the concept of
formalism.
Some versions of formalism evolved as a reaction against the earlier mimetic theories and yet,
like those earlier theories, often turn out to be accounts of painting’s value masquerading as accounts
of its essential nature. What they stress, and this is particularly so once technical achievements
of realism are largely mastered and widely demonstrated, is the artistic value that is to be
found in painting’s configurational aspects ( see Nanay “ Pictorial Organization” for a discussion of
surface pictorial organization and its relation to formalism, this volume).
Thus Clement Greenberg asserted that the history of painting from Manet and his contemporaries
to the Abstract Expressionists, whom Greenberg championed in his own day, was painting’s
progressive shedding of all that wasn’t essential to it, including that which could be achieved by
other art forms such as literature and sculpture. This culminated, he asserted, in painting achieving
a kind of “ flatness,” one that, in excluding three- dimensional space, is to be appropriately experienced
and evaluated only for its configurational aspects ( Greenberg, 1940). Greenberg allowed
that paintings after Manet might seem deeply committed to mimetic aims but argued that it was
only in virtue of their reference to their t wo- dimensional picture plane that they are to be judged
as paintings (1960/
1993).
Jonathan Gilmore
12
The historical and explanatory commitments a theory such as Greenberg’s must take on render it highly implausible as a theory of painting’s essence or value. It would have to claim that naturalistic painters outside the particular modernist tradition Greenberg narrates were misguided in what dimension of their craft best realized artistic or aesthetic values peculiar to painting. However, Greenberg’s theory can be charitably interpreted ( against his intentions) with much more limited scope: as a critical analysis of the aims of some of the painters he championed, making salient which of their properties are relevant to artistic appreciation of works in light of their aims or purposes ( see Gilmore, 2011). In the same way we might respond to Roger Fry’s justification of Post- Impressionism before a skeptical audience accustomed to traditional realist and academic modes of representation: we can consistently reject the claim that the investigation of form is central or essential to painting and yet acknowledge that such investigation might have a comparatively greater potential for the realization of artistic value in certain periods, for example, when the alternative project of naturalistic depiction seemed to reach a limit, or when abstraction seemed capable of communicating content that figuration could not.
5 Dual Aspect Accounts
When proposed as exclusive theories of painting, neither configurational nor representational accounts succeed. Configurational theories that focus on formal features and representational the-ories that focus on mimetic features each identify important dimensions of painting. Where they fail is in treating their favored dimension as central to the nature and value of the art form. Dual aspect accounts attempt to improve on those partial theories by attending to both those dimensions and how they interrelate.
One way to account for the dual aspects of a painting is to treat each dimension described above as contributing to a work’s value additively: the value of a painting is the sum of the values of our visual experience of the configurational elements and the represented content. Ernst Gombrich’s description of our experience of paintings as involving aspect perception seems to endorse this additive approach. He suggests that we flip back and forth in viewing a painting between seeing it as presenting its represented content and seeing it as a formal configuration of lines, patches of color, and so on. There, our experience of a painting involves a cognitive and perceptual opera-tion of seeing as: preferentially attending to some of a painting’s features lets us see it as one thing, preferentially attending to other features has us see it as another, as in the experience described in a novel by Jack London:
An oil painting caught and held him… There was beauty, and it drew him irresistibly. He forgot his awkward walk and came closer to the painting, very close. The beauty faded out of the canvas… He stared at what seemed a careless daub of paint, then stepped away. Imme-diately all the beauty flashed back into the canvas. ‘ A trick picture,’ was his thought, as he dismissed it…
(London, Martin Eden)
Although one could, like London’s character, attend to a single daub of paint to the exclusion of registering whatever object or scene it serves the representation of, the seeing-as account doesn’t explain how our in- p rinciple distinct forms of attention to configurational and representational elements of a painting can- - a nd perhaps in some cases must- - i nterrelate. On the one side, we cannot see a painting’s represented content without literally seeing features that belong to a de-scription of the painting’s configuration. We can’t, for example, see a red ball without seeing whatever lines, colors, and shapes constitute the representation of the red ball. On the other side,
Philosophical
Approaches to Painting
13
at least with figurative paintings, one of the non- a rbitrary ways to see the relevant configurational
properties of a painting as constituting a formal design or pattern is to see those properties in light
of the structure given to them by the object or scene they serve to represent. That is, among the
ways in which to objectively individuate lines, shapes, brushstrokes, and so on, on the surface of a
painting into distinct groups or patterns of color is to refer ( if only implicitly) to their contribution
to a visual experience of the painting’s represented object. It should be said that this is not the only
non- arbitrary way to individuate such configurational elements, for a painting’s surface may reveal
a pattern, e.g., a grid or a systematic direction of brushstrokes, that is of visual interest independent
of whatever the painting represents.
Richard Wollheim’s concept of seeing-in supplies a better characterization of our prima facie
experience of seeing a represented object in and through configurational elements, and of seeing
such configurational elements via their role in representing an object ( Wollheim, 1980). For
Wollheim, it is essential to the way pictures depict that they provide a “ twofold” experience: we
are aware of both a picture’s surface and what it depicts, and the latter is seen in the former. In
Wollheim’s proposal, the phenomenon of s eeing- i n comprises not two visual experiences between
which we flip back and forth, but one visual experience with two simultaneous dimensions: that
of a picture’s ( literally present) surface configuration and that of the ( not literally present) threedimensional
space the picture depicts. Seeing- in occurs in contexts outside of our encounters with
representations, as other phenomena— such as a cloud or a stained wall— permit us to see things
in their configured surfaces. But what distinguishes those experiences from pictorial depiction in
Wollheim’s view is that only the latter involves a form of normativity. There is no right or wrong
way to see a figure in a cloud, whereas there is plausibly the possibility of misrecognition and failure
to see altogether what is represented in a painting.
The source of the normativity Wollheim attributes to s eeing- in is tendentious. He suggests that
what is to be seen in the marked surface of a painting is constrained by what its creator intended,
but other accounts leave room for unintended depictions that are nonetheless recognizable via
seeing- in. Whether all paintings invite s eeing- in is also controversial. T rompe- l’oeil paintings
aim to diminish attention to their surface properties, even as those properties must be visually
registered to see the playing cards, letters, and so on, that the trompe- l ’oeil represents. And some
paintings, such as minimalist works and those of purely decorative design, frustrate attempts to
attend to any visually represented content, excluding even the appearance of a shallow spatial
depth that obtained in the most austerely non- fi gurative abstract expressionist works. Denying
that they offered a window onto some virtual scene, Frank Stella quipped of his paintings ( often
mounted on thick stretchers to emphasize their status as objects), “ what you see is what you see”
( Stella, 1966). While the tautology is of course true of even traditional figurative paintings that
invite s eeing- i n, a theory that posits seeing- i n as an essential dimension of the experience of any
painting either excludes many instances of what prima facie are paintings or invites the wrong
kind of experience of those works— w rongly recommending, say, that we seek to discover some
hidden object or scene emerging from a purely abstract design.
A third approach that recognizes the dual aspects of painting, a theory that is consistent with
Wollheim’s notion of s eeing- i n, holds that sometimes our awareness of a painting’s subject or content
is inflected by our awareness of the formal aspects of how it is rendered. Robert Hopkins describes
the purported phenomenon of inflection this way: “[s]ometimes, what is seen in a surface
includes properties a full characterization of which needs to make reference to that surface’s design
( conceived as such)” ( Hopkins, 2010: 158; see also Nanay, 2010). Demonstrations of inflection
typically feature cases in which our awareness of how paint and brushstroke are handled shapes
our perception of what is represented by those means. Thus, Michael Podro remarks of a painting
by Veronese of a woman turned away from us ( later titled Unfaithfulness) “ the sense of the brush
across the heavy weave canvas intimates the physical immanence of the woman’s back” ( Podro,
Jonathan
Gilmore
14
1998: 13). Here, Podro speaks of how features of the form or design of a painting are “ recruited” into the scene visible in the picture ( Podro, 1998: 13, 26). Comparably, we can say that our awareness of the mottled, textured, scored, and roughened surfaces of Lucien Freud’s paintings conditions our perceptual experience of the represented flesh of the people he portrays. Thus, in works that exhibit inflection, there can be an aesthetically or artistically valuable relationship be-tween our awareness of the represented object and of the nature of the particular configurational elements used to render it. In proposing the existence of that relation, the theory of inflection offers a way of understanding how the visual experience of an object within a painting might not be available, even in principle, outside of that form of representation.
However, it is not clear what the theory that some or all paintings exhibit inflection adds to the already noted point that it is in virtue of our literal perception of a painting’s surface qualities ( its configurational qualities) that we see its represented object ( Hopkins, 2010). Not all properties literally seen on the surface of a painting ( such as creases in a canvas or areas where pigment has faded) appropriately enter into our visual experience of its represented object. In this sense, paint-ings exhibiting inflection are not different in kind from those that do not. In all cases, viewers must at least implicitly decide which of a painting’s surface features properly constitute the work of art ( and which do not), and thus belong to it as a representational vehicle that determines how we see its object ( see Danto, 1981).
Perhaps ( as some of the figurative language characterizing its instantiation suggests) the phe-nomenon of inflection should not be construed as solely visual, but covers any case in which the content of a painting is in part constituted by an awareness of one or more of its physical properties— e. g., the gestures or tools it bears the traces of, the materials it is composed of, the textures of its painted surface or canvas support. Understood that way, inflection describes one of the ways in which the manipulation of the standard materials of the art form can contribute to its contents. That is, inflection shows one way in which aspects of what David Davies calls paint-ing’s “ vehicular medium”— t he materials that are operated on to produce a w ork— c an count as aspects of painting’s “ artistic medium”— materials or the manipulation of which, as such, supply a work’s meaning ( see Davies, 2005). As Davies (“ Sculpture,” this volume) writes, “ artistic medium mediates between the vehicular medium and the artistic content” ( see also, Boyce, The Medium(-Re) viewed,” this volume).
That recognition that the content of a painting is not merely causally dependent on, but con-stituted by an awareness of, its material constitution is registered in one of the founding texts in the history of painting, Alberti’s della pittura ( 1436), where the Renaissance humanist and artist in-structs painters to foreswear using actual gold leaf in the rendering of such things as angel’s haloes or blond hair, but to achieve the same effect through pigmented paint. In effect, Alberti, seeking to establish painting as a liberal or intellectual art, not a merely manual one, asks that such paint-ings convey the holy status of their subjects through solely representational and symbolic means, not via material with extra- pictorial value. Comparably, when certain materials in painting could be recognized both for their symbolic and actual value, they could serve dual roles as artistic me-dia, qua those materials. In, for example, certain paintings by Sassetta, the blue cloak Saint Francis gives to a poor knight is rendered in paint made from precious lapis- l azuli, not to merely present the bright blue color of the Saint’s gift, but to elicit in viewers a symbolic association between the significance of the Saint’s charity and the value of the gemstone ( Baxandall, p.11). More recently, Kerry James Marshall describes how he renders the skin of Black individuals in his paintings chromatically, through an exclusive use of black pigment, without any of the adjustments in tone ( lightness or darkness) that white or lighter pigments would offer. In these paintings, he notes “ blackness is n on- n egotiable....unequivocal...,” implying a contrast with those works in the West-ern canon in which the appearance of Black people is marginal or diminished ( Mason, 2016).
Philosophical Approaches to Painting
15
6 Conclusion
In the limited space given to this discussion, we followed philosophical accounts of the nature
of painting that address the distinctions between, and potential interactions among, visual representational
properties and visual configurational properties. Thus, we surveyed certain attempts
to characterize the nature of painting by appeal to its traditional representational role; its literal
surface appearance; and how the content of a painting may be constituted by a simultaneous
awareness of its representational content and its literal surface. Yet, as we saw in the discussion
of inflection and artistic medium, the content of a painting can be a function of more than its
visual properties, and what those visual properties express or symbolize. Indeed, in principle,
any physical property of a painting— the materials it is made of, the tactile nature of its surface,
the thickness of its supports— may be such that an intended recognition of it can enter into the
painting’s content. In this respect, the above discussion provides only a preliminary account of the
nature of painting. That is, whereas we may be able to identify some of the prototypical properties
of a painting under configurational or representational descriptions, these descriptions do not
capture all the contributions to the work’s content made by its artistic medium. For recognizing
what a work represents in and through its formal and material features may be only the first step
in identifying the preconditions of further sources of content, such as what a work expresses or
symbolizes. Finally, only through recognizing how paintings represent, express, and symbolize
can we begin to address such larger questions as how they can have cognitive values, elicit the
emotions, be subject to moral and political critique, and normatively constrain how they are conserved,
displayed, and interpreted.
Bibliography
Abell, Catharine. ‘ Pictorial Realism.’ The Australasian Journal of Philosophy 85.1 (2007): 1–17.
Alberti, Leon Battista. On Painting. Trans. John R. Spencer. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1956.
Aristotle. ‘Poetics’. In A New Aristotle Reader, edited by J. L. Ackrill. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1987.
Bann, Stephen. Paul Delaroche: History Painted. London: Reaktion Books; Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1997.
Bantinaki, Katarina. ‘ Pictorial Perception as Illusion.’ The British Journal of Aesthetics 47.3 (2007): 268–279.
Baxandall, Michael. Patterns of Intention. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1985.
———. Painting and Experience in Fifteenth Century Italy: A Primer in the Social History of Pictorial Style. 2nd ed.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.
Carroll, Noël. ‘ Empathy and Painting’. In The Routledge Handbook of Empathy, edited by Heidi Maibom.
Routledge, 2017.
Danto, A. The Transfiguration of the Commonplace. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Davies, David. ‘ Medium in Art.’ In Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics, edited by Jerrold Levinson, 181– 1 91.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Gaiger, J. Aesthetics and Painting. London: Continuum, 2008.
Gilmore. The Life of a Style: Beginnings and Endings in the Narrative History of Art. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 2000.
Gilmore, Jonathan. ‘ Between Philosophy and Art.’ In The Cambridge Companion to M erleau- P onty, 291, edited
by Taylor Carmen and Mark Hansen. Cambridge University Press, 2005.
———. ‘ A Functional View of Artistic Evaluation.’ Philosophical Studies 155, no. 2 ( 2011): 289– 305.
Gombrich, E. H. Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial Representation. London: Phaidon Press,
1960.
Goodman, Nelson. Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Co,
1968.
Greenberg, Clement. ‘ Towards a Newer Laocoon’. Partisan Review, 1940.
———. ‘M odernist Painting’. In The Collected Essays and Criticism: Modernism with a Vengeance, 1957– 1 969,
edited by John O’Brian. London: University of Chicago Press, 1993.
Jonathan
Gilmore
16
Hopkins, Robert. Picture, Image and Experience: A Philosophical Inquiry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
———. ‘ Inflected Pictorial Experience.’ In Philosophical Perspectives on Depiction, edited by Catharine Abell and Katerina Bantinaki. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Hyman, John. The Objective Eye: Color, Form and Reality in the Theory of Art. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Hyman, John and Katerina Bantinaki. ‘ Depiction’. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( Fall 2021 ed.), edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2021. https:// plato.stanford.edu/ archives/ fall2021/ entries/ depiction/.
Kulvicki, John V. ‘ Pictorial Representation.’ Philosophy Compass1.6 (2006a): 535–546.———. On Images: Their Structure and Content. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006b.
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim. ( 1766). Laocoön: An Essay on the Limits of Painting and Poetry. Trans. E. A. McCormick. Indianapolis: Bobbs Merrill, 1962.
Lopes, Dominic McIver. Understanding Pictures. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.
———. Sight and Sensibility. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
———. ‘ Painting’. In The Routledge Companion to Aesthetics, 3rd Edition, edited by Berys Gaut and Dominic
Lopes. London and New York: Taylor & Francis Group, 2013.
Mason, Wyatt. ‘ Kerry James Marshall Is Shifting the Color of Art History.’ New York Times, October 17, 2016.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. ‘Cézanne’s Doubt.’ In MauriceMerleau-Ponty:BasicWritings, edited by Thomas Baldwin. London: Routledge, 2004.
Nanay, Bence. ‘ Inflected and Uninflected Experience of Pictures.’ In Philosophical Perspectives on Depiction, edited by Catharine Abell and Katerina Bantinaki. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Newall, Michael. What Is a Picture? Depiction, Realism, Abstraction. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
Plato Republic. Trans. Paul Shorey. The Collected Dialogues of Plato. Ed. E. Hamilton and H. Cairns. Princ-eton: Princeton University Press, 1961.
Pliny the Elder. Natural History. Trans. H. Rackham. London: William Heinemann, 1952.
Podro, Michael. Depiction. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998.
Ruskin, J. (1843–60) Modern Painters, 5 vols. London: Smith, Elder & Co.; repr. London: J. M. Dent & Co., 1906.
Saussure, Ferdinand de. Course in General Linguistics. Trans. Roy Harris. London: Duckworth, 1983.
Schier, Flint. Deeper into Pictures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Steinberg, Leo. Michelangelo’s Painting: Selected Essays. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2019.
Stella, Frank. Art News(September 1966): 55–61.
Wollheim. ‘Seeing-as, Seeing-in, and Pictorial Representation.’ In Art and Its Objects, 1980.
———. Painting as an Art. Princeton: Princeton Press, 1987.
Wrigley, Richard. The Origins of French Art Criticism: From the Ancien Régime to the Restoration. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-4 17
2SCULPTURE
David Davies
1 Introduction
It is customary to begin recent philosophical discussions of sculpture by remarking upon how lit-tle philosophers have had to say on this subject as contrasted with the attention given to the other arts ( see, for example, the opening sentences of Vance 1995, Carter 2001, Hopkins 2005, Zuckert 2009, and Irvin 2 013 – f or a recent attempt to remedy this lacuna, see Gjesdal et al. 2020). It is also notable that, as both Hopkins and Zuckert note, this philosophical neglect of sculpture is not merely a recent development, even though sculpture has, at least since the inauguration of what Kristeller ( 1951) termed ‘ the modern system of the fine arts’, been listed, along with painting, liter-ature, music, and architecture, as one of the five major arts. Some authors have not only noted the relative inattention given to sculpture but have speculated on the reasons for this. Certainly, given that until the 20th century most of those things classified as works of sculpture were representa-tional and served broadly commemorative, and thus utilitarian, rather than specifically aesthetic, functions, it might be thought that sculpture was taken to raise no interesting philosophical ques-tions not raised in more tractable forms by the other arts. Consider, for example, the representa-tional capacities of traditional works of sculpture: while the manner in which t hree- d imensional subjects can be depicted on a two- d imensional surface might interest philosophers, the represent-ing of the three- dimensional by the t hree- dimensional seems less puzzling. An alternative expla-nation of the relative philosophical neglect of sculpture is that, like the equally neglected dance, sculpture seems to work through the physical properties of bodies and has been taken to appeal to the ‘ non- cognitive’ sense modality of touch rather than to the ‘ cognitive’ modality of vision. A third suggestion ( Martin 1976) is that sculpture has been thought to fail to be an autonomous art, being essentially related to works of architecture.
Whatever one thinks of these explanations, a different kind of motivation for the neglect of sculpture has emerged with the development, in Modernism, of non- r epresentational sculpture, and then the broadening, in the p ost- Mo dernist period, of the professed extension of the term. As we shall see in Section 2, this fosters the suspicion that the term ‘ sculpture’ fails to pick out an artistic domain whose denizens share properties that fund a class of distinctive philosophical problems. In Section 3, I shall consider various issues relating to the appreciation of sculptural art, even if these issues do not ground a definition of the art form. In Section 4, I shall briefly survey some further philosophical issues – m etaphysical and ethical – p resented by works of sculpture. The ethical issues relate to the ‘ public’ nature of many works of sculpture and the ways in which they might be held accountable to the public in whose lived environments they are located.
David Davies
18
2 The Definitional Project
In the opening chapter of his 1987 book, Sculpture since 1945, Edward Lucie- Smith remarks on the
difficulty of delimiting the artistic field to be surveyed in such a book:
As matters stand at present, one can only say that virtually anything at all can now be described
as ‘ sculpture’, ranging in format from three- dimensional forms made of traditional
materials - wood, stone or cast metal - to photographs, diagrams, verbal formulations or the
actions and gestures of the sculptor himself.
(8)
Lucie- Smith for the most part honors this liberal understanding of the term ‘ sculpture’ in his
book, incorporating separate chapters on Kinetic Art, Conceptual Art, Land Art, and ‘ Salvage
Art’. But one can sense a certain frustration with some of the examples he feels compelled to include.
For example, discussing Daniel Spoerri’s Dadaist Tableaux- pièges, made from things such as
a discarded breakfast tray in a hotel room, where ‘ every object, down to the empty shell of a boiled
egg, is fixed in the position where chance placed it at the end of the meal’, he comments that such
works, while three- dimensional objects, do not really fit ‘ even the loosest definition of sculpture’
( 66). And, remarking that works by Richard Long, Gilbert and George, and Joseph Beuys are
usually designated as ‘ sculptures’ both by the artists and those who analyze their work, and that all
of these artists had a background training in traditional sculpture, he expresses a concern that, in
so terming their works, such artists have created a confusion in the minds of the general audience
for art ( 126).
In trying to come to terms with the extensional intransigency of the term ‘ sculpture’ in late
Modernist contexts, Lucie- S mith follows in the more celebrated footsteps of Rosalind Krauss,
whose 1979 article, ‘ Sculpture in the Expanded Field’, sought to bring the diverse elements within
the contemporary extension of the term into some kind of intelligible order. Citing the traditional
relationship between sculpture, commemorative representation, and the monumental, and
attempts to relate Modernist works to this tradition by finding earlier analogues of the latter, she
addresses the more recent extension of the genre to include assemblages of objects and installations.
She reflects that
The very term we thought we were s aving - sculpture - has begun to be somewhat obscured.
We had thought to use a universal category to authenticate a group of particulars, but the
category has now been forced to cover such a heterogeneity that it is, itself, in danger of
collapsing.
(33)
Krauss offers a historical diagnosis of how we have arrived at what she terms the ‘ post- M odernist’
form of sculptural practice. She begins with the tradition encompassing Greek and Renaissance
works and enduring until the turn of the 20th century. It is these works that fit our ordinary
idea of sculpture, and that idea has an inner logic vested in a number of conventions that enable
sculptures to serve the purpose of ‘ commemorative representation’ in three- dimensions: a sculpture
‘ sits in a particular place and speaks in a symbolical tongue about the meaning or use of that
place...Sculptures are normally figurative and vertical, their pedestals an important part of the
structure since they mediate between the actual site and representational sign’ ( Ibid). With Modernism,
however, sculpture as an art repudiates this representational and monumental role and the
work becomes an abstraction or a pure marker, ‘ functionally placeless and largely s elf- referential’.
Krauss rejects attempts to explain how such works can still be sculpture by linking them to earlier
Sculpture
19
three-
dimensional artifacts. Rather, we need to take account of the negative nature of the Modernist conception of sculpture. As three- dimensional artworks that do not represent or commemorate something else, Modernist sculptures ( e.g. works by Brancusi, Moore and Giocametti) can be seen as defining themselves in terms of what they are not – they are to be contrasted with the natural landscape and with works of architecture. But once this way of thinking about sculpture is in place, it enables the ‘ post- Modernist’ idea of a matrix of conceptual oppositions relative to which works can be classified according to how they situate themselves in a conceptual space. This space is structured by the binary distinctions landscape/ not landscape, and architecture/ not architecture. It is in terms of occupying other positions on this m atrix – positions she terms ‘ site construction’, ‘ marked sites’, and ‘ axiomatic structures’ – t hat we can understand the range of things now labeled ‘ sculpture’ in the p ost- Modernist context.
In
Sculpture Now, however, which focuses on developments since the publication of Krauss’s article and L ucie- Smith’s book, Anna Moszynska ( 2013) takes Krauss’s efforts to impose some categorical order on the variety of things now counted as ‘ sculpture’ to have failed: ‘ the enormous range of c ross- f ertilization and experimentation she observed has now become ubiquitous and highlights the ongoing difficulty of defining “ sculpture” as a distinct category. Rather than an “ expanded” field, the range of concerns in the new sculpture may perhaps more aptly be described as an “ exploded” field’ ( 12). The crucial development here, for Moszynska, is the proliferation of installation art starting in the early 1990s.
This
presents the philosopher with a problem if she feels some obligation to preface her discussion of particular philosophical issues associated with an art form by giving the reader some sense of the distinguishing features of works in that art f orm – f eatures by reference to which our understanding of such issues might be clarified. This duty is normally discharged by providing something like a definition, albeit one that may pick out a class with decidedly fuzzy edges. Recent attempts to survey the philosophical dimensions of sculpture have adopted diverse strategies in the face of this problem. Robert Hopkins ( 2005), for example, identifies but then sets aside the definitional project in the case of sculpture, stating in another piece written at the same time that ‘ there are grounds... for doubting that sculpture admits of any interesting definition’ ( 2004, 164). Curtis Carter, however, whose primary concern is to do justice to the philosophical tradition and, to borrow Krauss’s term, to ‘ salvage’ the traditional category of sculpture, starts with a definition that fits those p re- Modernist and Modernist works of sculpture that precede the ‘ expansion’ of the term, in the hope that this definition might be modified to accommodate modern pretenders to that title. He takes as his stalking horse a definition offered by the Encyclopaedia Britannica: sculpture is ‘ the art of representing observed or imagined objects in solid materials and in three dimensions’. Carter makes it clear that, while such a definition aims to distinguish sculpture from natural objects and from other kinds of artifacts, it is only through the reference to the art of sculpture that this might be achieved. The art of sculpture involves a practice embodying norms whereby treating materials in a certain way confers a determinate ‘ artistic’ content on the product. But he also admits that this definition, while it is useful for thinking about p re- Mo dernist sculpture and fits well with traditional views of sculpture presented by writers such as Lessing and Hegel, requires serious modification if it is to accommodate not only Modernist works that eschew representational goals, but also p ost- Mo dernist works such as kinetic and light sculptures. Such works do not make artistic use of solid materials and use methods other than casting, modeling, and carving.
A
third approach begins by granting the legitimacy of the ‘ explosion’ in the concept of sculpture described by Moszynska and then attempts to craft a definition that can encompass such a plethora of works. Sherri Irvin ( 2013), for example, begins by accepting that the term ‘ sculpture’ is correctly applicable not just to traditional works serving representational and broadly commemorative functions, but also to kinetic works, installations, and earthworks such as Robert Smithson’s Spiral Jetty. All of these developments, she maintains, ‘ are outgrowths of earlier sculptural
David Davies
20
traditions and practices’ ( 606). One might wonder whether this in itself is a sufficient reason to treat such developments as sculpture. We may recall L ucie- S mith’s concerns about the use of the term ‘ sculpture’ to describe works by Beuys and Richard Long even though they were trained as sculptors, and we might also consider that film is treated as a distinct art form, even though it developed out of photography. We may also recall Krauss’s attempts to think the relationship between pre-Modernist, Modernist, and post-Modernist three-dimensional works that does not appeal to historical precedents but seeks an ‘ extended’ sense of sculpture that preserves the tradi-tional sense as a proper part.
Irvin acknowledges that subsuming all of these developments under the same category of art presents a problem for the definitional project and also stresses the importance of preserving ac-cepted distinctions between sculpture, painting, architecture, and performance art. She offers the following tentative definition in the interests of clarifying where further work needs to be done: ‘ sculpture is the art form consisting of the articulation or presentation of objects geared centrally toward appreciation in three spatial dimensions ( and possibly the temporal dimension), excluding substantially constructed buildings and works involving the living human body’ ( 607).
The final exclusion might be difficult to reconcile with the principle of inclusion cited to jus-tify classifying installations and earth art as sculpture, given that the ‘ living sculpture’ of Gilbert and George is very much an outgrowth of sculptural practices by artists trained as sculptors. The bulk of the definition relies on two features central to traditional definitions of sculpture: the three- dimensionality of sculpture which differentiates it from painting, and the distinctive kinds of appreciation for which sculptural works call ( see Section 3).
There are obviously complementary concerns associated with the kinds of definitional proj-ects considered thus far. If, on the one hand, we start with established p re- Mo dernist sculptural works, this promises to identify a class of works that can be expected to present distinctive kinds of problems for philosophical consideration. One such problem, obviously, is the way in which such works are able to function as representations, and another, to be examined below, is the dis-tinctive kinds of engagement for which they call, as contrasted with paintings and architecture. However, even Modernist sculpture is difficult to explain in terms of the p re- Modernist project, as Krauss points out. On the other hand, a definition that embraces the contemporary ‘ explosion’ of purportedly sculptural works threatens to delimit a field of entities that cannot be expected to share aspects calling for philosophical reflection, and thus threatens to make the philosophy of sculpture a field of little interest once the definitional project is complete.
With this in mind, an alternative approach offered by Eric Koed ( 2005) is attractive. Koed pro-poses that we start by trying to define not sculpture, as a class of works, but rather the sculptural, as a property that certain a rtworks – i ncluding works of s culpture – h ave. We can then appeal to aspects of artistic practice to explain why some sculptural works are rightly classified as works of sculpture. Talk about the sculptural, for Koed, is closely tied to the traditional idea that works fall into a given category of art in virtue of sharing an ‘ artistic medium’. The latter is taken to be a set of understandings in virtue of which carrying out specific operations on a physical ( or, in the case of arts like music or literature, non- p hysical) material of some kind – what might be termed ( Davies 2005) a ‘ vehicular medium’ – c an count as articulating a particular artistic content. ( As Walton’s much cited example ( 1970) of ‘ guernicas’ illustrates, a given vehicular medium can be associated with different artistic media.) Talk of artistic media is really talk about how a given class of works work, how an artist is able to articulate a particular determinate artistic content by doing something in a vehicular medium.
Koed applies this general approach to sculpture, defining the sculptural not in terms of the three- d imensionality of the artwork, but in terms of the particular kind of role played by three- dimensional aspects of the artistic vehicle in the articulation of its artistic content. This way of thinking about works of sculpture – as a subset of those things that are sculptural in the relevant
Sculpture
21
sense
– has the added virtue, according to Koed, of explaining those more immediately apparent properties of sculptures upon which traditional attempts at definition have focused. These at-tempts have sought to delimit the field of sculpture in terms of either:
a
The physical properties of the w ork – in particular, its being t hree- dimensional as contrasted with the supposed two-dimensionality of pictures – or
b
The distinctive role of our cognitive and perceptual faculties in the appreciation of the work.
Koed
argues that t hree- dimensionality in itself is a property of all artworks whose artistic vehicles are physical objects, and that all of the other definitional approaches fail to apply to at least some accepted works of sculpture, even if they capture aspects of the ways in which the sculptural functions as an artistic medium.
The
crucial difference between sculptural and pictorial representation, according to Koed, is that, while the artistic vehicles employed in both kinds of representations have three- dimensional properties to which we may need to attend to properly appreciate the representational contents of the works, in sculptural representation these properties are employed as a representational artistic medium rather than, as in the case of pictorial representation, as a ‘ material condition’ for such a medium. While the two- dimensional array whereby pictures have their representational content is causally grounded in the accumulation of pigment on a surface – sometimes, as in the works of Van Gogh and Auerbach, the use of thick i mpasto – three- dimensionality here serves the interests of a two- dimensional artistic medium. In the case of sculptural representation, however,
The
thickness or weight of the material itself plays the role of artistic medium....For example, [we] take the protrusions and ridges of the material a rt- o bject themselves to represent the protrusion of brow and cheekbones... A work will be sculptural, on this account, just to the extent that the use of the three- dimensional properties of materials functions as a medium in this way.
(
151)One might ask whether Koed’s distinction between the sculptural and the pictorial, if it is intended to distinguish the artistic medium in sculpture from the artistic medium in painting, operates with an artificially narrow conception of the role of an artistic medium. As I expressed this above, the artistic medium mediates between the vehicular medium and the artistic content of a work, but a work’s artistic content goes beyond its representational content and also comprises its expressive and exemplificational content. Koed’s distinction between the sculptural and the pictorial, however, seems to restrict artistic content to representational content. If, on the other hand, we operate with a broader concept of artistic content that includes expressive content, paintings by van Gogh and Auerbach might qualify as sculptural rather than pictorial because it is in virtue of the three- dimensional properties of the pigmented canvas that the work has the expressive content that it does.
Koed
tries to address some related worries. He maintains that, while in the pre- Mo dernist tradition in Western art, the sculptural and the pictorial were coextensive with sculpture and painting, respectively, this association was always contingent. In the present context, sculptural artworks include not only what we would normally classify as works of sculpture but also some works of architecture, jewelry, and Installation Art ( which Koed seems to assume, pace Moszynska, is not sculpture). Citing the range of works encompassed by sculpture in Krauss’s ‘ extended’ sense, Koed concludes that
The
conception I propose of sculpture in terms of the sculptural is compatible with this kind of diversity within sculpture, and also with the fact that we can and do speak of the sculptural
David
Davies
22
elements of m ixed- m edia works that we would not, perhaps, classify as “ sculptures.” [Krauss’s] examples are sculptural works, or have significant sculptural elements, but are they sculp-tures? The answer, on the proposed account, will depend on the facts of the works’ relation-ship to the traditions of art practice out of which they emerge.
(153)
3 The Appreciation of Sculpture
We noted in part I that some writers have taken the defining property of sculpture, as con-trasted with other art forms, to be the kind of artistic appreciation for which it calls. Such claims are expressed in various ways in the tradition that focuses on p re- Modernist and/ or Modernist sculpture. But, even if we accept that sculpture is not be defined in terms of distinctive kinds of cognitive or perceptual capacities that are mobilized in its appreciation, the literature on sculp-tural appreciation is of great philosophical interest in its own right and continues to occupy the attention of philosophers. Three themes have predominated in the discussion: ( 1) the idea that the primary sensory modality through which we engage with works of sculpture is touch, as contrasted with the predominantly visual nature of our appreciative engagement with paintings; ( 2) the re-lated idea that, in appreciating works of sculpture, we engage in distinctive kinds of imaginings grounded in our embodied response to the t hree- dimensionality – the ‘ volume’ – o f the artistic vehicle; and ( 3) the idea that to appreciate a work of sculpture is to experience not merely the artistic vehicle per se, but the manner in which the work’s physical manifestation articulates the gallery space in which it is located. I shall look at these points in turn.
3.1 Sculpture and Touch
The association between sculpture and touch is central to Herder’s work on sculpture and is discussed at some length in a recent article by Rachel Zuckert ( 2009). While the contemporary inclusion of sculpture amongst the major fine arts ensured that it received at least some attention in 18th- and 19th- c entury German aesthetics, Herder’s account ( 2002) is one most interesting of these treatments. While a particular work of sculpture is central to the argument of Lessing’s Laocoön, Lessing ( 1984) uses this example to represent visual artworks in general, drawing a contrast with literary works that, so he claimed, are better fitted for representing events that succeed one another in time. Lessing’s choice of a sculptural work like the Laocoön might reflect two contingent facts: the lack of classical works of visual art that could help to make Lessing’s auxiliary point about the difference between Greek and Roman culture, and the existence of both a visual and a literary representation of the very same event, supporting his principal claim about the different proper representational domains of the different arts. Herder, however, wrote a treatise specifically on sculpture in support of a claim about its distinctiveness from painting. His central contention was that to grasp the three- d imensionality of a work of sculpture requires that it be apprehended in terms of concepts given to us not through vision but through touch – concepts such as ‘ mass, weight, solidity, three- d imensional space ( depth and volume), and t hree- dimensional form’ ( Zuckert 2009, 287). Zuckert summarizes Herder’s view as follows:
Through vision, we do not attain experience of the sculpture as a whole, as unified, but only ex-perience a series of surfaces from different viewpoints, which inferentially and incompletely add up to a representation of the work as a whole.
(Ibid.,289)
Herbert Read ( 1956) also argues that the principal sensory modality involved in the appreci-ation of sculpture is touch and offers similar reasons in support of this claim:
Sculpture
23
For the sculptor, tactile values are not an illusion to be created on a two- d imensional plane: they constitute a reality to be conveyed directly, as existent mass. Sculpture is an art of palpation-an art that gives satisfaction in the touching and handling of objects. That, indeed, is the only way in which we can have direct sensation of the t hree- dimensional shape of an object.
(348)
Critics, however, have argued that our appreciative practices in respect of works of sculp-ture do not accord a central role to touch. Indeed, standard gallery practice prohibits such forms of engagement. Rhys Carpenter ( 1960), for example, claims that ‘ sculpture is a visual and not a tactile art, because it is made for the eyes to contemplate and not for the fingers to feel’ ( 34). And the sculptor Adolf von Hildebrand claimed ( 1932) that it is through the t wo- dimensional visual manifolds presented to us as we move relative to a work of sculpture that the work’s artistic nature is given to us.
3.2 Sculpture and Embodied Response
A related approach grants that a work of sculpture is not given to us through acts of touching but maintains that our visual engagement with such a work is inflected by our embodied responses to its three- d imensionality, eliciting in us imaginings grounded in its presence as something with volume and mass. The sculptor L. R. Rogers ( 1962), for example, implicitly counters Hildebrand in offering the following account of what he terms ‘ sculptural thinking’:
Sculptors think through the mass; the movements on the surface, the surface forms, are the out-ward manifestation of movements that must be thought of as continuing through the mass. There is an internal structure which has to be sensed in order to appreciate a work as a t hree- d imensional design. Sculptors who think only of the outer defining planes of their work are not thinking in a fully three-dimensional way.
(298) Robert Vance ( 1995) offers a more extreme development of this idea. ‘ Sculptures’, he main-tains, ‘ are objects designed in three dimensions to occupy spaces related to the spaces we our-selves occupy. In contrast with mere objects in real spaces, sculptures somehow depend on the appreciator’s bodily self- awareness for their presence to us as sculptures’ ( 224). In appreciating a given sculpture, he argues, we begin by moving around the work, registering how it looks and feels from various perspectives. These observations evoke ‘ certain n on- p ropositional so-matic imaginings’, including ‘ tactile imaginings’ of how it would feel to be touching or holding it, ‘ haptic imaginings’ as to how it would feel to stretch or lift it, and ‘ kinaesthetic imaginings’, for example, imagining oneself sliding on or moving with it. These imaginings invoke somatic sensations, and these, in turn, engender ‘ identifications with the sculpture’:
My being aware of motor sensations of resistance and imbalance, within a context of imagining what it feels like to lift ( a part of) a sculpture, is tantamount to imagining my being ( the part of) the sculpture...The appreciator then identifies with the sculpture by imagining it as an extension of her own body.
(225)
Finally, this identification with the sculpture affects how we see it: ‘ The sculpture will look dynamic, threatening, or inscrutable, because it feels dynamic, threatening, or inscrutable’ (Ibid.).
David
Davies
24
3.3 Sculpture and Space
F. D. Martin ( 1976) also maintains that what are distinctive of our appreciative engagement with works of sculpture are our embodied responses to their physical presence: ‘ with sculp-ture tactual feelings come into play in a much more direct and important way than with painting’. But he ties this not to an identification with the sculptural object itself, but to our engagement with the space that the object defines:
The space around a sculpture, although not a part of its material body, is still an essential part of the per-ceptible structure of that sculpture. And the perceptual forces in that surrounding space impact on our bodies directly...With a sculpture... even though we do not actually touch the material body, we sense its power penetrating the surrounding space and pressing on our bodies...The forces of a sculpture, since they are generated by t hree- dimensional material, activate the surrounding space, making us explicitly aware of the impacting surrounding space as part of the perceptible structure of the sculpture.
(283)( Hopkins ( 2003, 277) finds a similar idea in Hegel.)
The idea that sculptures work aesthetically through their ability to articulate the space in which they are located is central to the thinking of Susanne Langer ( 1953), but Langer provides a clearer account of how such articulation enters into our experience of a work. She begins ( 87) by criticiz-ing Hildebrand for assimilating sculpture to painting. It is important, she maintains, not only to acknowledge what painting, sculpture, and architecture have in c ommon – they operate through a primary illusion of ‘ virtual space’ – but also the different ways in which they do this. While paintings create a virtual ‘ scene’ in t hree- dimensions, works of sculpture, which are already three- dimensional, make ‘ visible’ the space around them, as part of the volume of the work. The space made visible by the work of sculpture ‘ is more than the area which the figure actually occu-pies’. The illusion depends upon ‘ the fundamental principle of sculptural volume: the semblance of organism’ ( 88). Organisms, she maintains, have structures that fit them to the environments they inhabit, and they in turn experientially structure their environment by reference to the ways in which it speaks to their needs. An organism experiences its environment as
A space whereof he is the center; his body and the range of its free motion, its breathing space and the reach of its limbs, are his own kinetic volume, the point of orientation from which he plots the world of tangible reality.
( Cf J. J. Gibson’s talk ( 1979) of ‘ affordances’ and Merleau- Ponty’s characterizations ( 1962) of a logic shared by a body and its world.)
The space that a work of sculpture makes visible to receivers is then its ‘ virtual kinetic volume’, created by ‘ the semblance of living form’. ‘ A piece of sculpture is a center of three- dimensional space. It is a virtual kinetic volume, which dominates a surrounding space, and this environment derives all proportions and relations from it, as the actual environment does from oneself’ ( 90). Langer stresses that this does not require that works of sculpture represent natural organisms, and that the primary illusion of sculpture is given not to vision but to touch, since it is through touch that volume is originally presented to us. The business of sculpture, she claims, is ‘ to make tactual space visible’ ( 90). But we experience the virtual space of the statue as something objective, dis-tinct from our own lived space even as we engage experientially with it:
Though a statue is, actually, an object, we do not treat it as such; we see it as a center of space all its own; but its kinetic volume and the environment it creates are illusory - they exist for our vision alone, a semblance of the self and its world.
(92)
Sculpture
25
In a series of papers, Robert Hopkins ( 2003, 2004, 2005) has elaborated upon, critically assessed, and defended Langer’s views as a more plausible account of sculptural experience than the other views just discussed, although, as we have seen, this does not provide us with a definition of sculpture.
4 Other I ssues – S culptural Representation, Metaphysical Questions, and the Public Nature of Sculpture
While we have focused on questions pertaining to the nature of sculpture and of sculptural ap-preciation, it is important to note some other aspects of sculpture that have elicited philosophical attention. I shall briefly survey three such issues:
4.1 Sculptural Representation
While the nature of depiction has been a central issue in the philosophy of painting, relatively little philosophical attention has been paid to the nature of representation in sculpture. In the case of traditional representational works of sculpture, this may stem from the assumption that such works unproblematically represent their subjects by reproducing their t hree- dimensional shapes, but, as Goodman ( 1968) pointed out in C hapter 1 of Languages of Art, resemblance in itself cannot explain how visual artworks function as representations. One philosopher who has looked at how contemporary work on depiction in painting might be extended to representational sculpture is Robert Hopkins ( 2003, 2004, 2005), but he takes these issues to be interconnected with the issues of sculptural appreciation discussed in the previous section. It is also worth noting that, as Hopkins points out, the kinds of ‘ relief’ sculptures that predominated in historical contexts where works of sculpture complemented works of architecture employ techniques that stand in an intermediate position between painting, on the one hand, and the kind of f ull- b odied sculpture in the round discussed by Langer, on the other.
4.2 Metaphysical Questions
As Sherri Irvin notes ( 2013), works of sculpture have served as a running example in metaphysical debates about the relationships between artifacts more generally and the material of which they are composed ( see, e.g., Thomson 1998). One issue in such debates is whether artifacts such as stat-ues have a legitimate place in our ontology or whether our ontological commitments should only be to the ‘ stuff’ of which they are made. Adherents of the former view hold that a statue at a given time is constituted by the physical stuff with which it is colocated but is not identical with that stuff: the statue – ‘ Goliath’ in a famous e xample – and the lump of clay – ‘ Lumpl’ – are different entities, so it is claimed, because they differ in their modal and persistence properties. For example, Lumpl, but not Goliath, might survive being placed in a very hot oven, whereas Goliath, but not Lumpl, might survive restoration work to repair damage caused by vandalism.
Traditional sculptures raise further metaphysical questions because of the different ways in which they can be made, and, as a consequence, the different metaphysical status of the work itself. In the literature on traditional works of sculpture, a distinction is drawn between three ways in which such works can be initiated: the artistic vehicle may result either ( i) from the carving of some material, or ( ii) from building up some material so as to model what is represented, or ( iii) from the prior construction of a cast into which some liquid material is poured so that, once the material has set, the vehicle can be removed from the cast. In the latter case, it is usually possible to produce multiple instances of the work from the same cast. In this sense, carved and modeled works of sculpture are singular – they admit of at most one correct ‘ instance’ that can play the ‘ experiential
David Davies
26
role’ in the appreciation of the work – t hat is, that can provide the experiences necessary to fully grasp the manifest content of the work. Works of cast sculpture, however, are multiple, admitting at least in principle of more than one such correct instance. Works of carved and modeled sculp-ture, like paintings, are most naturally thought of as physical objects, but, while the instances of works of cast sculpture are also most naturally taken to be physical objects, the works themselves surely are not. They must be things that can have other multiple things as their instances and, in a tradition going back to Richard Wollheim’s Art and its Objects ( 1968), such works have been taken to be types. But arguably ( see Dodd 2007, chaps 2 – 3), types exist eternally and cannot be created but can only be discovered. So, it might seem, had Rodin produced The Thinker as a work of carved sculpture, it would have been his creation, whereas his use of a cast in the production of this work means that it was not created but discovered. Some have found this conclusion highly problematic ( see, e.g., Davies 2013) and have sought an alternative account of the nature of such multiple artworks ( see Davies forthcoming).
4.3 The Public Nature of Sculpture
As noted earlier, it was long taken for granted that the primary role of works of sculpture was to represent and commemorate individuals or events accorded particular significance in the com-munity where the work was located. To play this role, sculptural works have traditionally been located in a public space and this raises issues as to the accountability of the work to the pub-lic. But we need to distinguish at least two senses in which a work can be said to be a work of ‘ public sculpture’. First, this can mean that the work is situated in a space that is public, where the latter might in turn be taken to mean a space the use of which within a given society is open to ( appropriate) use by all duly recognized members of that society. Second, it can mean that a work is publicly funded, rather than funded by some private interest, corporate or individual. Dubuffet’s Group of Four Trees in the forecourt of the Rockefellers’ Number One Chase Manhattan Plaza is public in the first sense but not in the second, Nelson’s Column in London is public in both senses, and commemorative works commissioned by individuals for their private grounds are public in neither sense. For any work of sculpture that is private in the first sense, there might be concerns about the way in which this work might impact on the well- being of those whose lives require that they use the location in which it is installed. For any work that is public in the second sense, there might also be questions about the accountability of the work to the public in whose name, and with whose resources, it was built.
As some have noted ( e.g. Hein 1996), the second question becomes particularly acute in m ulti- cultural societies where different communities may have different values. Traditionally such issues were ignored, the values of the majority generally ruling at the cost of the values of the minority. For example, the publicly funded statue of Robert E. Lee erected post- bellum in Richmond VA celebrated the values of the defeated confederacy but, presumably, not those of the ones liberated as a result of that defeat. But current moves to replace or destroy statues taken to commemorate the colonial legacy in various countries indicate the potentially problematic nature of commem-orative representational works that are ‘ public’ in either of the above senses. Related issues are at the center of the very acrimonious debates over Richard Serra’s publicly funded abstract work Tilted Arc, installed in the plaza outside the Javits Federal Building in Manhattan in 1981, but then removed following a public inquiry. While the latter events were clearly in part an expression of political sentiments at the time, a principal reason given for removing the work of sculpture was that it was unacceptable to those whose ordinary lives required that they use the plaza. One of the more interesting philosophical issues surrounding this case relates to Serra’s claim that his work, in addressing aspects of the existing architecture of the Plaza, was ‘ site- specific’ and would therefore
Sculpture
27
be destroyed if moved. In a very interesting paper, Michael Kelly ( 1996) explored what it would mean for a work of sculpture to be both public, in our first sense, and site- s pecific, arguing that, while it should not be up to the public to determine which works of public sculpture should be installed ( pace Carter 2001), the public uses of the site partly identify it as the public site it is, and these uses must therefore be taken account of by an artist if her work can legitimately claim to be site- specific to a public site.
References
Carpenter, Rhys. ( 1960). Greek Sculpture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Carter, Curtis. ( 2001). ‘ Sculpture’, in Berys Gaut and Dominic McIver Lopes, eds., Routledge Companion to Aesthetics 1st ed. New York: Routledge, 503– 517.
Davies, David. ( 2005). ‘ Medium in Art,’ in Jerrold Levinson, ed., Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 181–191.
Davies, David. ( 2013). ‘ What Type of ‘ Type’ Is a Film?’, in Christy Mag Uidhir, ed., Art and Abstract Objects. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2 63– 283.
Davies, David ( forthcoming). The Ontology of Multiple Artworks ( Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Dodd, Julian. ( 2007). Works of Music. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gibson, J. J. ( 1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.Boston:Houghton-Mifflin.
Gjesdal, Kristin, Fred Rush, and Ingvild Torsen, eds. ( 2020). Philosophy of Sculpture: Historical Problems, Con-temporary Approaches. London: Routledge.
Goodman, Nelson. ( 1968). Languages of Art.Indianapolis:Bobbs-Merrill.
Hein, Hilde. ( 1996). ‘ What Is Public Art?: Space, Time, and Meaning’, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 54.1,1–7.
Herder, J. G. ( 2002 [1778]). Sculpture: Some Observations on Shape and Form from Pygmalion’s Creative Dream, trans. Jason Gaiger. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hopkins, Robert. ( 2003). ‘ Sculpture and Space,’ in Matthew Kieran and Dominic Lopes, eds., Imagination, Philosophy, and the Arts. London: Routledge.
Hopkins, Robert. ( 2004). ‘ Painting, Sculpture, Sight and Touch’, British Journal of Aesthetics44.2,149–166.
Hopkins, Robert. ( 2005). ‘ Sculpture,’ in Jerrold Levinson, ed., Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 572–582.
Irvin, Sherri. ( 2013). ‘ Sculpture’, in Berys Gaut and Dominic McIver Lopes, eds., Routledge Companion to Aesthetics 3rd ed. New York: Routledge, 6 06– 615.
Kelly, Michael. ( 1996). ‘ Public Art Controversy’, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism54.1,15–22.
Koed, Eric. ( 2005). ‘ Sculpture and the Sculptural,’ Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism63.2,147–154.
Krauss, Rosalind. ( 1979). ‘ Sculpture in the Expanded Field’, October8,30–44.
Kristeller, Paul. ( 1951). ‘ The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in the History of Aesthetics Part I,’ Journal of the History of Ideas12.4,496–527.
Langer, Susanne. ( 1953). Feeling and Form. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Lessing, Gotthold. ( 1984 [1766]). Laocoön: An Essay on the Limits of Poetry and Painting, trans. E. A. McCor-mick. Baltimore, and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lucie-Smith, Edward. (1987). Sculpture Since 1945. New York: Phaedon.
Martin, F. David. ( 1976). ‘ The Autonomy of Sculpture,’ Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism34.3,273–286.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. (1962). The Phenomenology of Perception, trans. Colin Smith. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Moszynska.(2013).Sculpture Now. London: Thames and Hudson.
Read, Herbert. ( 1956). The Art of Sculpture. New York: Pantheon.
Rogers, L. R. ( 1962). ‘ Sculptural Thinking’, British Journal of Aesthetics2,291–300.
Thomson, Judith. ( 1998). ‘ The Statue and the Clay,’ Noûs32, 149–173.
Vance, Robert. ( 1995). ‘ Sculpture,’ British Journal of Aesthetics35,217–226.
von Hildebrand, Adolf. ( 1907 [1893]). The Problem of Form in Painting and Sculpture, ed. and trans. M. Meyer and R. M. Ogden. New York: G. E. Stechert & Co.
Walton, Kendall. ( 1970). ‘ Categories of Art’. Philosophical Review79: 334–367.
Wollheim, Richard. ( 1968). Art and Its Objects. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zuckert, Rachel. ( 2009). ‘ Sculpture and Touch: Herder’s Aesthetics of Sculpture,’ Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism67.3,285–299.
28
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-5
3
PRINTMAKING
Impressions, Editions, and Reproductions
Roy T. Cook
1 Introduction
In this essay, we will, for the most part, concentrate on traditional forms of printmaking, understanding
such forms to involve a process that can be described roughly as follows:
A work is a print if and only if it involves the transfer of pigment from a matrix ( e.g. etched
plate) to a support ( e.g. paper).1
The variety of distinct printmaking methods that fall under this description is too wide to describe
in any detail but includes intaglio ( including aquatint, drypoint, engraving, etching, and
mezzotint), lithography, screenprint, woodblock, and more. Note that this description leaves out
many contemporary processes that fall under the informal use of the terms “ print”, “ printed”, and
“ printmaking”, such as digital prints of various kinds. Note also that it includes works that are not
necessarily artworks, such as screen-printed t-shirts and newspapers.2
Christy Mag Uidhir ( 2009, 2015) makes much of the observation that, unlike painting and
sculpture, prints and printmaking have been resistant to serious academic investigation and analysis.
3 He identifies a number of related reasons for this. First, printmaking has traditionally been
a commercial, rather than purely artistic, enterprise: while there have been artists making what
we would now term original prints in Europe since the 15th century ( e.g., Albrecht Dürer) and as
early as the 7th century in China ( e.g., The Great Dharani Sutra), printmaking was nevertheless
associated more with the reproduction of paintings, and less with the idea of prints as themselves
being independent original artworks. This print-as-copy tradition goes back to 15th/ -
16th- century engraver Marcantonio Raimondi, who was strongly influenced by Dürer, and who
has the distinction of being the first artist whose body of work consists primarily of prints that
copy pre-existing paintings. We will return to consider such reproductive prints in detail later in
this essay.
Second, the practicalities of the printmaking process itself, where the “ a rtist” oversees the production
of prints but often turns over the actual work of physically creating the impressions to a
master printmaker in his employ, further exacerbates the idea that with printmaking, as opposed
to painting, sculpture, or photography, the aesthetic and artistic is firmly subordinated to the
commercial. As Mag Uidhir notes, printmaking was not included in traditional art school curricula
until the latter half of the 20th century, and the regular inclusion of prints alongside paintings
and sculptures in exhibits and academic studies is an equally recent phenomenon ( 2 015: 2). As a
Printmaking:
Impressions, Editions, and Reproductions
29
result, printmaking has in the past been viewed as a commercial trade as much or more than as a
skilled artistic endeavor.
As printmaking transformed during the 20th century, emphasis was placed on the novel notion
of an original print, in contrast to reproductive prints, largely due to the need to properly situate
this ostensibly commercial enterprise within existing art world culture and extant marketing
practices. This process has been neither simple nor equitable: Peg Zeglin Brand ( 2015) traces the
development of this concept of originality in the 20th century and argues that it was mobilized
not only to legitimize the status of ( non- reproductive) prints as fine art but also to continue the
aesthetic devaluation of art made by women ( based on supposed failures to create sufficiently original
work) and indigenous people ( based on apparent tensions between originality and adherence
to cultural tradition).
In addition, printmaking has been widely hailed as the most democratic art form, as is evidenced
by the following passage from the website of the Library of Congress:
Prints have been referred to as the “ democratic art” because they provide a means of making
works of art widely available. As with some of the other popular art media, such as posters
and book and magazine illustrations, prints have historically been a democratic medium in
the sense that they early offered a field in which women artists could flourish.
( Library of Congress, n.d.)
Unfortunately, this is only half true. Brand also provides a detailed historical account of the plight
of women printers, which supports the first point but refutes the second, concluding that:
Printmaking may be a more democratic art because impressions occur in multiples and can be
sold or distributed more widely, but it does not follow that women are more democratically
represented or are invited to participate with men, who continue to dominate the profession
when measured in terms of commecial success and recognition.
(Brand 2015: 42)
As attitudes and exhibition practices have changed, providing prints ( m ostly by men, but happily,
also including an increasing number of women) their own space in the exhibition hall and in
the public consciousness, aestheticians and philosophers of art have slowly risen to the occasion,
exploring various interesting and unique questions that the processes and products of fine art
printmaking raise.4 In the remainder of this essay, we will address a cluster of issues of this sort that
distinguish printmaking from painting and sculpture in various ways. Each of the issues addressed
here involves, in one way or another, the multiply instanced nature of prints.
First, we will explore the fact that prints are typically not, like most paintings and sculptures,
individual physical objects that have unique locations in space ( m onotypes being obvious exceptions).
On the contrary, a single print ( l ike a single opera or musical work) seems to inhabit more
than one place at the same time, in virtue of the multiple, physically distinct impressions of the
print, whose status as instances of the work is usually indicated by their numbering in a series or
edition (e.g., “1 of 250” or “1/250”).
Second, we will ask questions about the artwork status of individual editions of a print ( a nd
the impressions making up the edition), and the artwork status of individual impressions over and
above their status as instances of the print artwork in question.
Third, we will consider the connections between printmaking and paintings, addressing the
role that prints and printmaking have played in providing surrogates for paintings, where experience
of the surrogate print is meant to be a suitable alternative to direct experience of the painting
so surrogated.
Roy
T. Cook
30
Finally, in the conclusion, we will focus a bit more on the official subject matter of this volume,
looking more closely at the similarities and differences between the ontology of painting,
sculpture, and prints.
2 Prints, Editions, and Impressions
At first glance, prints look ontologically very different from both paintings and sculptures ( and, in
the relevant sense, look more like theatrical and musical works) in that they are multiply instanced:
for instance, the 250-impression 1964 edition of Warhol’s Flowers appears to be a single work of
art, but one which has 250 multiple instances, located where the 250 impressions in the edition
are located.5
Before moving on, it is worth noting some complications that arise in distinguishing prints
from paintings and sculpture in terms of multiplicity. First, the multiply instanced status of fine
art prints ( o r printing in general) does not provide anything like the sharp division between printmaking
and either painting or sculpture suggested in the previous paragraph. On the one hand,
there are printmaking methods that produce single unique works ( e.g., monotypes). On the other
hand, there are sculptural techniques that generate multiple ( often numbered) instances in ways
that look at least superficially similar to the multiplicity common, but not universal, amongst
prints. The most obvious such method is cast metal sculpture.6 Nevertheless, it seems right to say
that prints are standardly multiple, while paintings and ( most forms of ) sculpture are not. The word
“ standard” is used here in the sense introduced by Kendall Walton, where a property is a standard
feature of a category of works if it is “ among those in virtue of which works in the category belong
to that category” ( 1970: 339).
The widely ( but by no means universally) accepted philosophical account of such multiply
instanced entities invokes the type-token distinction. According to this story, a multiply instanced
entity involves both a single abstract type and at least a potential multiplicity of tokens of that
type. Thus, the sentence “ Snow is white” involves both multiple physical tokens, such as the one
mentioned at the beginning of this sentence, and a single presumably abstract type, of which the
individual tokens are instances. The multiply instanced nature of printmaking can be understood
along similar lines: there is the ( singular and presumably abstract) Warhol print Flowers 1964; and
then there are 250 instances of that artwork, the physical objects ( i mpressions) denoted by Flowers
#1/250 through Flowers #250/250.7
Of course, this account of multiply instanced works might be rejected for any number of reasons,
but the most obvious such reasons are connected to familiar metaphysical puzzles that plague
abstract objects more generally. For example, one might just reject the existence of abstract objects
altogether, preferring the desert landscape of nominalistic metaphysics ( Mag Uidhir’s nominalistic
basic print ontology, discussed below, is such a view). Or one might not be averse to abstract objects
in general, but instead have worries, in the present context, regarding the apparent mismatch between
the fact that artworks have beginnings ( and possibly endings) in time ( i.e., there is a time at
which they are created, and possibly a time in which they are destroyed, in virtue of all instances,
and perhaps also the matrix, being destroyed), while abstract objects have traditionally been understood
as atemporal or eternal.8
David Davies (2015) mobilizes a somewhat different objection to the print-as-abstract-type
account. He notes that if the instances of a multiply instanced work are instances of an abstract
type, but singly instanced works are concrete, then the creator of a multiply instanced lithograph
is discovering an abstract object, while the creator of a monotype is creating a concrete object. Finding
such lack of uniformity in the ontology of printmaking “ deeply counterintuitive” ( 2015: 86),
Davies concludes that what unifies distinct impressions of a print is not that they instance some
abstract type, but rather that they share a history of production. Hence, on Davies account, there
Printmaking:
Impressions, Editions, and Reproductions
31
is no artwork referred to by “the print Flowers 1964”. Rather, there are just the 250 individual
numbered impressions, each of which is a distinct and self- subsistent object. These prints are related
to each other in a particular and special way and are not related to any prints by, for example,
Rembrandt, in that same way, but on Davies account we can explain this relationship in terms of
the history of creation shared by the 250 prints that make up Flowers 1964 without needing to posit
any additional, singular, abstract artwork of which these impressions are instances.
Another account that retains the idea that prints are distinguished from ( most) paintings and
sculptures in virtue of their multiplicity, but reject the traditional t ype- token account and its apparent
commitment to abstract objects, is Christy Mag Uidhir’s basic print ontology (2009, 2012).
For our purposes, two main aspects of this view are salient. First:
Basic print ontology, I claim, is nominalistic – t he works of printmaking ( that is, the products
of printmaking forms, processes, or techniques) are concrete, individual, and distinct prints.
[…] To be a print is to be the individual and distinct concrete product of a printmaking
process ( typically operating over a template and onto a support). Furthermore, prints are
characterized according to and have their character largely determined by the processes of
which they are the products ( f or example, a lithograph is the print product of the printmaking
process known as lithography, a screen print is the print product of the printmaking process
known as screen printing, and so on). Most importantly, being a print itself entails neither
being a copy not being a reproduction. Thus, prints are individual, distinct works, and this
fact remains consistent across the vast majority of printmaking processes, save the varieties of
monotyping, being capable of producing multiple ( what I call) relevantly similar prints.
(2012: 32–33, emphasis in original)
Mag Uidhir fleshes out what he means by relevantly similar prints as follows:
[…] two prints are relevantly similar to one another if and only if they share all constitutive
appreciable properties in common in virtue of sharing a causal history. Two prints share a
causal history if and only if they are printed from the same template ( e.g. a particular etched
copper plate), by the same process ( e.g. intaglio), onto the same support ( e.g., paper).
( 2009, n.p., see also 2012: 33)
Thus, Mag Uidhir, like Davies, concludes that there is no additional o bject – t he print – in addition
to the individual impressions.
In addition, Mag Uidhir goes on to argue for a claim he calls permissive art ontology – the claim
that the artwork status of a particular print depends solely on its causal history in the sense sketched
above: if a particular impression ( say, an impression contained in the 250 numbered impressions in
Warhol’s Flowers 1964) is an artwork, then any other print created ( i) from the same template, ( ii)
via the same process, and ( i ii) onto the same support will also be an artwork. Thus, although being
an editioned print ( o r trial proof, or hors de commerce, etc.) – that is, being an impression that
is one of the impressions included in an edition such as the 250 sanctioned impressions of Flowers
1964 – requires certain intentions on the part of the artists ( in particular, the intention to include
this, rather than that, as one of the 250 impressions in the edition), whether or not a particular
impression is an artwork is, on Mag Uidhir’s account, independent of the artist’s ( or master printmaker’s,
or anyone else’s) intentions over and above the intentions involved in creating the matrix
and selecting the relevant process and support. In particular, prints that are generated illicitly ( e.g.,
by a thief who breaks into the printmaker’s shop for the purpose of printing additional copies of
Flowers to sell) or even prints that are generated accidentally ( e.g., by a thief who breaks into the
printmaker’s shop for the purpose of stealing tools, but who accidentally jars the press, resulting in
Roy
T. Cook
32
an impression being created) are works of art in exactly the same sense as are prints intentionally
created by the artist or the master printer (2009:
n.p.).
It is here where Mag Uidhir’s and Davies nominalistic print ontologies differ: with respect to
the art status of the individual impressions: Mag Uidhir thinks that each impression ( authorized
or not, intentional or not) transferring pigment from matrix to support in the right manner is an
individual work of art, while Davies is skeptical that impressions ( rather than, say, editions) are
themselves works of art, arguing that distinct impressions from an edition do not typically admit
of sufficient ( non- accidental) variation to count as distinct works of art ( Davies 2015: 90). We shall
return to this idea regarding the role that variation plays in artwork status below.
While Mag Uidhir’s permissive print ontology is controversial ( see, e.g., Gover 2015 for some
objections specific to prints, and Aliyev 2016 for objections to Mag Uidhir’s application of these
ideas to photography), it highlights an important aspect of printmaking that raises further questions. Unlike many other multiply instanced art forms ( and independent of the ontological status
of the print of which the impressions are instances), prints are not only instances of an artwork ( if,
contra Mag Uidhir (2009), there is an object – the print – over
and above the individual impressions), but, arguably, are works of art themselves.
Cook and Meskin ( 2015) argue that prints are art-
instances:
each individual impression of a particular print is a distinct artwork, over-and-
above the singular artwork of which they are instances
( again, if, contra Mag Uidhir, such a singular type exists). This contrasts with the status of many
other multiply instanced artworks. Novels, for example, are multiply instanced, but my copy of
Moby Dick is not an artwork in-and-
of- itself, distinct from the artwork that is your copy of Moby Dick. Instead, there is a single art work
– Moby Dick – which can be experienced via many different
instances of it.
As Cook and Meskin note, the mere fact that instances of a multiply instanced artwork are
themselves artworks need not imply that the artwork admits of art- instances. Rather, whether an
artwork ( or art form more generally) allows for art- instances amounts to something like “ whether
actual or possible instances of the work can ( or typically would) be artworks themselves solely in
virtue of being instances of that artwork” ( 2015: 58). Cook and Meskin go on to argue that what makes
it the case that some multiply instanced forms allow for works that are not only multiply instanced
but involve art- instances ( e.g., music, theater, and printmaking), while other art forms that are
multiply instanced do not allow for art- instances ( e.g., literature and film) are the practices of production and reception within which the artwork ( and the art form more generally) are embedded.
They argue in some detail that the practices and attitudes embedded in both the production and
the consumption ( by dealers, buyers, critics, and the like) of fine art prints support the treatment
of individual impressions as distinct works of art ( 60– 61, see also Mag Uidhir 2012). Hence, it
follows that distinct impressions are ( typically) distinct works of art and should be treated as such.
Cook and Meskin defend this production/ reception approach from other accounts of the nature of art instances, including ( i) the idea that art instances arise via performance, and ( ii) the idea
that art instances arise via interpretation ( 2015: 59– 60), since, if either of these ideas were correct,
then prints – in virtue of involving neither performance nor interpretation in their production – could
not be art instances.9 Finally, they scrutinize Jerrold Levinson’s claim that:
[…] individual impressions, castings, and so on are occasionally regarded as works of art in
their own right, which may be appropriate where there are striking differences among authorized instances.
(1996:
134)
As we have seen, Davies ( 2015) objects to the idea that individual impressions are art instances on similar grounds. Cook and Meskin argue, on the contrary, that whether or not an art form admits
Printmaking: Impressions, Editions, and Reproductions
33
of art instances is independent of whether and to what extent works in that form admit variation.
Rather, whether an art form allows for art instances depends on the practices of production and reception
appropriate to that art form. Hence, if an art form ( e.g., printmaking) standardly admits of
art instances, then we can and should treat individual instances ( i.e., individual print impressions)
as distinct sui generis art works, even in cases where the authorized instances vary little if at all.10
We have, until now, only addressed in passing the fact that prints are not merely multiply
instanced, but editioned: print artworks do not merely involve a hodge- podge of instances but
instead are intimately tied up with the practice of authorizing certain such impressions as members
of an edition. Thus, the impressions included in Flowers 1964 were authorized by Warhol as
elements in that edition ( a nd their status as such indicated by being labeled #1/ 2 50 through #250/ -
250, distinguishing them from impressions not in that edition). Timothy Van Laar ( 1980) argues
that editions are not merely collections of instances but consist of the instances – the particular
impressions that make up an edition of a print are parts of the print:11
A primary function of printmaking is to create flexible, constantly changing spatial structures
which exist through the necessary repetition of a visual idea. Each print in an edition is part
of the overall structure which is an edition
( 1980: 101, emphasis in original)
While Karen Gover finds this idea implausible, arguing that typically:
[…] there is no structural principle uniting the prints in an edition beyond their shared history
of production and whatever particular circumstances led the artist to include a certain
number of prints within it.”
(2015: 77)
Nevertheless, she emphasizes that Van Laar is correct in taking the edition to be an important –
perhaps the important – unit of assessment when considering the ontology of printmaking and
notes further that artist’s i ntention – a nd not mere relevant similarity in the sense outlined by Mag
Uidhir – i s critical to determining whether or not a particular impression is included in a particular
( o r any) edition of the print. As a result, Gover argues that Mag Uidhir’s permissive print
ontology, although perhaps correct as far as it goes, misses an important aspect of the metaphysical
nature of prints. While relevant similarity might be sufficient for an impression to be an artwork –
hence, any impression, intentional or accidental, taken from the matrix used for Flowers 1964 is
an artwork – this is not, in fact, the interesting and important issue. Rather, what is desired is an
account of what, exactly, makes a particular impression an instance of this artwork – that is, of this
edition – a nd Gover argues that this requires more than mere similarity. It requires the authorization
of the impression by the artist.
Gover’s essay makes clear the fact that the ontology of printmaking is not merely a simple one
of singular type versus multiple impressions instancing that type. Instead, prints are doubly articulated.
At the most c oarse- g rained level, we have the print, the singular work of art, which might
or might not be an abstract type ( o r some other sort of abstract object). At the most fi ne- g rained
level, we have the ( p otentially infinite) collection of individual impressions ( a uthorized or not). In
the middle, however, we have the division of prints into distinct editions ( s ome authorized by the
artist, and some, such as p ost- m ortem editions of Rembrandt prints, not). This distinguishes prints
from other multiply instanced art forms such as novels, films, and music that lack an analogous,
intermediate editioning stage in their ontology.12
Finally, we will investigate a phenomenon that was mentioned in the introduction: the use of
prints as affordable or more easily accessible substitutes for original ( typically singly instanced)
Roy
T. Cook
34
paintings ( and other works). While the prevalence and popularity of this sort of reproduction may
have been one of the factors hindering recognition of fine art printing as a s elf-s ubsistent art form
in and of itself, the use of prints as replacements of a sort for direct experience of the painting
on which the print is based raises interesting philosophical questions regarding the relationship
between printing and painting, and between pictures ( of pictures) and what is pictured in both.
A reproductive print, according to Robert Hopkins ( 2015), is a print “ that takes another picture
as its source, and that attempts to depict whatever the source does, at least insofar as difference
in medium allows” ( 2015: 11). Not all reproductive prints reproduce paintings, although we will
focus on this special case here. As we have already noted, one of the main uses of printmaking
technology has been to create reproductive prints, which have served as a primary source of
epistemic connection to famous works of art since the 15th century. Even in a world of intercontinental
travel and digital connectedness, this remains true: the vast majority of persons have not
travelled to the Louvre to see the Mona Lisa, but many of those who have not nevertheless believe
that they know what the painting looks like based on their experiences of prints ( photographic or
not) of the painting in question.13
This example highlights a number of issues that arise with regard to the use of a reproductive
print as an epistemic surrogate for the painting upon which the print was based. The first, and most
obvious, is that such reproductions can be misleading: the Mona Lisa is a striking example, since the
o ver-s ized role that this painting plays in popular culture, coupled with the fact that most people’s
exposure to the painting is mediated primarily by photographic print reproductions ( e.g., in books)
that are not one-to-one in scale, lead many viewers at the Louvre to be surprised – sometimes
even d isappointed – b y the comparative smallness of the actual 21 by 30 inch painting. But it is
obviously not just with regard to matters of scale that prints of paintings can mislead: prints do not
reproduce texture, do not allow one to view the painting from different distances or angles, and
often utilize methods particular to printmaking ( e.g., crosshatching in an etching) to mimic other
methods particular to painting ( e.g., shading achieved by various methods of blending pigments).
Nevertheless, reproductive prints have been and continue to be one of the main ways that those
interested in paintings gain knowledge about how particular paintings look.14 Hopkins ( 2015) focuses
on this aspect of prints – what he calls aesthetic surrogacy – and asks two inter-related questions
which he calls the articulation question and the explanation question. The articulation question arises
when we ask: What kind of engagement can one have with the aesthetic properties of an original
painting Π via experiencing the reproductive print RΠ based on Π? The explanation question arises
when we ask: What kind of explanation can we give of the fact that a reproductive print RΠ based
on Π can facilitate a genuine experience of aesthetic properties of painting Π ( i f, in fact, RΠ can
facilitate such experience in the first place)?
Hopkins then surveys a number of potential answers to these questions. The view with which
he begins ( a nd, as we shall see, with which he ends) is the simple view: the reproductive print RΠ
facilitates experience of the aesthetic properties of the original painting Π via sharing those properties
with Π. This view, however, faces a serious challenge: reproductive prints, in virtue of the
fact that they are, obviously, prints and not paintings, are easily distinguishable from the paintings
on which they are based. And this, in turn, holds because a painting Π and a reproductive print
RΠ that is based on Π instantiate very different n on-a esthetic perceptual properties. As a result,
any account that attempts to explain how a reproductive print RΠ can allow for experience of the
aesthetic properties of painting Π must reject widely accepted a nti-g eneralist theses of the sort endorsed
by Mary Mothersill ( 1 986) and Frank Sibley ( 2 001), according to which artifacts can only
share aesthetic properties in virtue of sharing (all of ) their perceptual non-aesthetic (Mothersill)
or determinate non-aesthetic (Sibley) properties.15
Hopkins considers a number of other ways that one might attempt to explain how it is that
a reproductive print RΠ might afford access to the aesthetic properties of print Π, including the
Printmaking:
Impressions, Editions, and Reproductions
35
Waltonian-
inspired idea that the reproductive print RΠ serves as a prop in a fi ction- l ike game of
make-belief (2015: 15–16), the idea that the reproductive print RΠ is a translation of an image from
one medium to another ( 2 015: 14), and the idea that a reproductive print RΠ serves as a source of
testimony regarding the original painting Π ( 2015: 16), finding each of them wanting.
Perhaps most interesting alternative he considers is based on the idea that pictures are transparent:
pictures of objects do not typically have all or even many of the properties had by the objects
pictured, yet they give us epistemic access to those object and their properties. Thus, is it possible
that pictures, in general, and reproductive prints, in particular, give us access to the aesthetic
properties of the works pictured in a similar manner? Hopkins suggests not. Reproductive prints
do share at least some of the content of the work being reproduced. Thus, a reproductive print of
Da Vinci’s Mona Lisa provides epistemic access to the appearance of the same woman to which
Da Vinci’s painting gives us access. But this woman presumably does not possess the aesthetic
qualities had by the painting – these are properties that hold in virtue of the way Da Vinci painted
the woman, not properties inherent in the woman who was painted. In short, the transparency account
provides us with a story regarding the manner in which reproductive prints provide us with
access to the objects depicted in the painting being reproduced, and to the properties possessed by
those objects, but does not provide an explanation of how we might access the aesthetic properties
of the painting itself ( 2015: 15).16
Given the failures of these accounts, Hopkins concludes that the only viable means to explain
the fact – if it is indeed a fact – that a reproductive print RΠ based on painting Π can facilitate
access to the aesthetic properties of Π is via some version of the simple view. We are left, however,
with the following challenge: if, as seems to be the case ( a nd, as we have already noted, as seems
to be assumed by centuries of art education based on exposure to reproductive prints as aesthetic
surrogates) we can somehow access the aesthetic properties of an original painting Π via direct
experience of a reproductive print RΠ, then we need to formulate a more nuanced account of the
connection between aesthetic and n on- aesthetic properties according to which two objects can
share many of their aesthetic properties ( i .e., they can afford similar types of aesthetic experiences)
while exhibiting very different n on- aesthetic perceptual properties ( i.e., they are very different
physical tokens).17
3 Conclusion
The accounts of the ontology and epistemology of printmaking surveyed above are enough to
convince the skeptic that philosophical consideration of prints and printmaking has and will continue
to yield significant rewards. The multiply instanced nature of prints, the division of the particular
impressions that are instances or parts of a print into various editions ( a s well as the setting
aside of some impressions as outside any edition), and the status of individual impressions as art
instances ( i ndependent of interpretation or performance), all contribute to a rich and significant
structure. In short, prints and printmaking has its own distinctive ontology and epistemology and
hence differs in important ways from other art forms, such as painting and sculpture.
But learning that printmaking is quite different from painting and sculpture is not merely a
lesson regarding the ways that printmaking works. In addition, seeing the significant ways that
printmaking differs from painting and sculpture also helps to highlight important connections
between these initially quite different looking art forms.
To see this, we need only consider the fact that a feature that is standard for an art form need
not be standard for all its sub- forms. Printmaking and sculpture both provide examples of this.
Some kinds of printmaking ( m onotyping) standardly produce singular works, while there are subcategories
of sculpture that seem to exhibit a tripartite ontological division into work/ editions/-
castings similar to the standard work/ e ditions/ i mpressions structure we have explored above
Roy
T. Cook
36
with regard to printmaking (and where, in addition, the individual sculptural castings are art- instances).
18 Thus, multiplicity is standard for printmaking, but contra- standard for monotypes,
while singularity is standard for sculpture, but contra- standard for some types of cast sculpture.
Had we restricted our attention solely to multiply instanced prints ( and were we to ignore similar “ non- standard” cases in sculpture), we might have begun this essay with a simple ontological
map that grouped paintings and sculpture squarely on the one side, and prints on the other, based
on whether they are singly or multiply instanced, as in Figure 3.1:19
As just noted, however, the ontological picture is in reality more like Figure 3.2:
By attending not only to the differences, but also to the similarities and overlaps between the ontologies of these distinct art forms, we see that the relevant divisions are not merely between those forms that produce singular works and those that are multiply instanced. Instead, the reality is that there are more complicated relationships between these art forms, their sub- forms, and the various ways that an artwork can have multiple physically and spatially distinct instances. As a result, learning more about the multiplicity of ( non- monotype) prints will likely provide us with insights into the ontology of some forms of sculpture ( e.g., editioned, cast sculpture), and learning more about the singularity of painting and ( non- cast) sculpture will, for similar reasons, provide us with insight into the singularity of some prints ( e.g., monotypes).20 There remains much work to be done.Figure 3.1Figure 3.2
Printmaking: Impressions, Editions, and Reproductions
37
Notes
Roy
T. Cook
38
18 It is worth noting that there are other kinds of sculpture that might be multiply instanced but do not
exhibit the work/edition/casting structure. For example, some ready- mades such as Duchamp’s Fountain
or Bicycle Wheel seem multiply instanced in virtue of the fact that distinct objects have served as the whole
of the work at different times. There does not seem to be any analogous way that two different print
impressions could each serve as the whole of a print at different times. 19 Of course, in contrast to the simplistic picture about to be sketched, and summed up in Figure 3.1, we
carefully reminded ourselves numerous times that much of the discussion above failed to apply to monotypes, and hence the arguments considered were at best arguments regarding what metaphysical features
were standard for prints, and not what features universally hold of prints. 20 Thanks are owed to Christy Mag Uidhir, Aaron Meskin, and Marcus Rossberg for helpful discussions
on issues connected to this essay. In addition, thanks are owed to the other speakers and attendees at the
2013 Printmaking and the Philosophy of Art workshop at the University of Houston, who taught me a
lot about the philosophy of prints and printmaking.
References
Abell, Catherine (2015), “ Printmaking as an Art”, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 73(1):
23– 30.
Aliyev, Alexey ( 2016), “ Unfit to Print: Contra Mag Uidhir on the Ontology of Photographic Artworks”,
Estetika: The Central European Journal of Aesthetics 1: 3– 13.
Brand, Peg Zeglin ( 2015), “ The Role of Luck in Creativity”, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 73(1):
31– 55.
Cook, Roy T. & Aaron Meskin ( 2015), “ Comics, Prints, and Multiplicity”, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 73(1):
57– 67.
Davies, David (2015), “Varying Impressions”, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 73(1):
81– 92.
Goodman, Nelson (1976),
Languages of Art, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Gover, Karen E. ( 2015), “ Are All Multiples the Same? The Problematic Nature of Limited Editions”, The
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 73(1):
69– 80.
Hopkins, Robert ( 2015), “ Reproductive Prints as Aesthetics Surrogates”, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 73(1):
11– 21.
Howell, Robert ( 2002), “ Types, Indicated and Initiated”, The British Journal of Aesthetics 42: 105– 127.
Kendall, Walton ( 1970), “ Categories of Art”, Philosophical Review 79: 334– 367.
Levinson, Jerrold (1996),
The Pleasures of Aesthetics: Philosophical Essays, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Levinson, Jerrold ( 2012), “ Indication, Abstraction, and Individuation”, in Art and Abstract Objects, Christy
Mag Uidhir (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 49– 61.
Mag Uidhir Christy ( 2009), “ Unlimited Additions to Limited Editions”, Contemporary Aesthetics 7: n.p.
Mag Uidhir, Christy ( 2012), “ Photographic Art: An Ontology Fit to Print”, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 70(1):
31– 41.
Mag Uidhir ( 2015), “ Introduction: Special Issue on Printmaking and the Philosophy of Art”, The Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism 73(1):
1– 8.
Meskin, Aaron ( 2012), “ The Ontology of Comics”, in The Art of Comics: A Philosophical Approach, Aaron
Meskin and Roy T. Cook (eds.), London: Wiley- Blackwell, 31– 46.
Mothersill, Mary (1986),
Beauty Restored, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ravasio, Matteo (2018), “Replicating Paintings”, Contemporary Aesthetics 16: n. p.
Rossberg, Marcus ( 2013), “ Destroying Artworks”, in Art and Abstract Objects, Christy Mag Uidhir ( ed.),
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 62– 83.
Scott, David A. ( 2018), “ The Replication of Veronese’s Wedding at Cana and of Duchamp’s Bicycle Wheel:
Two Iconic Works as Their Surrogates”, Studies in Conservation 63(3):
127–
138.
Sibley, Frank ( 2001), “ Particularity, Art, and Evaluation”, in Approach to Aesthetics: Collected Papers on Philosophical Aesthetics, Frank Sibley, John Benson, Betty Redfern and Jeremy Roxbee Cox ( eds.), Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 88– 103.
The Library of Congress ( 2019), American Women: Fine Prints, online at: https://memory.loc.gov/ammem/awhhtml/awpnp6/fineprint_coll.html. Retrieved November 1, 2019.
Van Laar, Timothy ( 1980), “ Printmaking Editions as Artworks”, The Journal of Aesthetic Education, October, 97– 102.
Walters, Lee ( 2013), “ Repeatable Artworks as Created Types”, The British Journal of Aesthetics 53: 461–
477.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-6 39
4EROTIC ART AND THE NUDE
Hans Maes
While there are countless art historical studies of the nude and of erotic art, philosophy has largely remained silent on the subject. This is regrettable, not only because it means that a longstanding and very popular tradition in painting and sculpture is being ignored, but also because erotic art raises all sorts of interesting philosophical questions. Given the scope of this essay I can only ad-dress a few of those here. Section 1 focuses on the conceptual issue of what erotic art is and how it relates to the genre of the nude. Sections 2– 4 investigate how aesthetic experiences are connected to, or different from, erotic experiences. Section 5 explores the boundaries between the erotic and the pornographic with attention to notions such as harm, objectification, and medium.
1 The Erotic, the Sexual, and the Nude in Art
In Sex and Reason, Richard Posner proposes to use the word “ erotic” to describe “ presentations and representations that are, or at least are taken by some viewers to be, in some sense ‘ about’ sex-ual activity” ( Posner 1994: 351). This characterization needs some narrowing down if one wants to arrive at a definition that captures the extension of what we ordinarily think counts as erotic art. For one thing, such a definition should exclude scientific- b ehavioral studies or medical illus-trations of sexual activity ( which tend to be neither erotic nor artistic in nature). Furthermore, it’s not the case, simply because some viewers take a painting or a sculpture to be about sexual activity, that we are ipso facto dealing with an erotic representation. Someone who is unfamiliar with the story of the Bible might take a crucifixion painting to be a depiction of a s ado- m asochistic act, but that would be insufficient grounds to call, say, Tintoretto’s Crucifixion ( 1565) a work of erotic art.
Peter Webb’s definition of erotic art as “ art on a sexual theme related specifically to emo-tions rather than merely actions, and sexual depictions which are justifiable on aesthetic grounds” ( Webb 1975: 2) is already closer to the mark. But even though Webb’s emphasis on emotions is understandable from an etymological point of v iew – the term “ erotic” derives from the Greek word “ eros” meaning love or passion – h is definition is still too broad. Max Beckmann’s The Night ( 1 918– 1 919) depicts the horrors of a rape and so does qualify as “ art on a sexual theme related spe-cifically to emotions” and yet it would be very misleading to label it as an erotic painting.
Instead of claiming that erotic art is about sexual feelings or desires, one could say that erotic art elicits sexual feelings or desires. But this characterization would also be too broad. A pious Madonna and Child painting may elicit sexual feelings or desires in some people, but that in and of itself does not make it erotic art. The intention to be sexually stimulating appears crucial, as Jerrold
Hans Maes
40
Levinson acknowledges in his definition of erotic art as “ art which aims to engage viewers sexually
through explicit sexual content, and that succeeds, to some extent, in doing so” ( Levinson
2006: 252). But does erotic art really need to be explicit? Camille Claudel’s sculpture The Waltz
( 1889) is suggestive, rather than explicit, and yet it is often described as an erotic masterpiece.
The definition I propose is the following: erotic art is art that is made with the intention to
stimulate its target audience sexually, and that succeeds to some extent in doing so. This raises the
further question what sexual stimulation precisely entails. According to Guy Sircello ( 1979: 119),
it is the inducing of sexual feelings where the latter might be ( 1) feelings in our sexual parts, or ( 2)
feelings in other erogenous parts. However, a kick below the belt will give a man certain feelings
in his sexual parts, but not of the sort that erotic art is supposed to engender. So, an important
qualification is needed. Sexual stimulation is probably best understood as the inducing of sexual
feelings, desires, and imaginings, that would generally be regarded as pleasant in themselves.
If a nude is traditionally defined as a work of fine art that has as its primary subject the unclothed
human body, it should be clear that many but not all nude paintings and sculptures qualify as
erotic art; and vice versa. As to the broader category of sexually themed art, it could be argued that
all works of erotic art have a sexual theme, but not the other way around: many artworks with a
sexual theme are not works of erotic art ( e.g. Max Beckmann’s The Night).
Anti-erotic art could be defined as art that ( successfully) aims to induce negative sexual feelings,
thoughts, and imaginings in its target audience. For example, many feminist artists have explored
the dark, violent, abject aspects of sexuality in their work ( see, for instance, Kiki Smith’s Tale
1992, and Blood Pool 1992). Finally, because censorship and moral policing have often prevented
artists from making work that is openly erotic, it is worth drawing attention to the existence of
covertly erotic art, that is, art made with the covert intention to stimulate its target audience sexually
and that succeeds to some extent in doing so. A good example are the woodblock printed and
hand painted “ sukashi shunga” ( hidden shunga) that were popular in Japan at the beginning of
the 20th century. What at first sight appear to be beautifully drawn postcards depicting landscapes
with some space in the middle and at the corners to write one’s message, when held up to the light,
turn out to be sexually explicit lovemaking scenes ( Aki 2013: 47).
2 The Aesthetic Disenfranchisement of the Erotic
Are there überhaupt any works of erotic art? This may seem a silly question, especially to anyone
who is familiar with art history and with the well- established tradition of erotic art in particular.
But to students of modern aesthetics, that is, the philosophy of art and beauty from roughly the
beginning of the 18th century to the end of the 19th century, that question will not appear absurd
at all.
Modern aesthetics famously built a wall between aesthetic pleasure, on the one hand, and sensual
or sexual pleasures, on the other hand, leaving precious little room for works that aim to combine
the two. The problem becomes clear when we consider Immanuel Kant’s Critique of Judgment
( 1790), arguably the most influential work of that period. According to Kant, a judgment of beauty
is based on a feeling of disinterested pleasure, i.e., a pleasure that does not depend on or generate
a desire for the object. But since works of erotic art are precisely meant to tap into and stimulate
our sexual appetites and desires, it is hard to see how they can be the object of an aesthetic judgment.
They are rather primed to be the object of what Kant calls a judgment of the agreeable,
based on an “ interested pleasure,” in this case the titillation provided by the alluring depictions of
attractive bodies and seductive poses. The sensual pleasure offered by such representations is very
different from the enjoyment that occurs in an aesthetic experience and which results from the
free play of the cognitive faculties of imagination and understanding. According to Kant, it is because
aesthetic judgments are grounded not in any interest, but rather in the subjective conditions
Erotic
Art and the Nude
41
of cognition, which are shared by all rational beings, that they can lay claim to universality. The
pleasure solicited by erotic art can obviously not lay claim to such universality since it will depend
on one’s sexual preferences and inclinations.
Kant was not the first to introduce disinterestedness as hallmark of the aesthetic and isolate it as
such from what is merely sensually or sexually appealing. Anthony Ashley Cooper, the third Earl
of Shaftesbury, is often credited with this insight. In his Characteristics of Men, Manners, Opinions,
Times ( 1711) Shaftesbury already stated that the response solicited by beauty is one of rational and
refined contemplation, far removed from the crude pleasures that we receive through our senses.
A problem that immediately arises for Shaftesbury’s account is the one posed by the “ dazzling
form” of a beautiful woman ( 1964: 136). Here, beauty and sensual appeal, far from being antithetical,
actually seem to go hand in hand. Still, Shaftesbury insists that the two kinds of pleasure are
utterly distinct, even though, in this particular case, erotic pleasure may indeed follow in the wake
of aesthetic pleasure. One could make a comparison, he writes, with someone who goes from contemplating
the beauty of a tree to fantasizing about its tasty fruits. Both activities are pleasurable,
but the pleasures involved are very different: one is a disinterested aesthetic pleasure, the other is a
pleasure informed by our s elf- interest. It points to a sensual joy, based on an appetite that we have
in common with animals, or “ brutes” as Shaftesbury prefers to call them. The contemplation of
beauty, by contrast, is unique to us rational beings. That’s because beauty is exclusively an object
of the mind.
But can one really draw the distinction in such absolute terms? When we admire an attractive
man or woman, isn’t it precisely their beauty that activates the senses and gives rise to certain bodily
passions? Shaftesbury dismisses this line of thought almost out of hand. After all, we wouldn’t say
that it is the beauty of the fruit that attracts and brings joy to the prowling animal in search of food.
What whets and satisfies appetite of both humans and animals is not the striking form, but what
lies beneath that striking form, that which is mere matter. Just as it is not the material that makes
a sculpture beautiful, but rather the artistic intentions and designs that shape the material, so it is
not the body in itself, something that is mere matter, that is beautiful: “ What is it you admire but
mind, or the effect of mind? Tis mind alone which forms. All which is void of mind is horrid, and
matter formless is deformity itself ” ( 1964: 132). Mind is the only true object of beauty. Moreover,
it is only through the mind that beauty can be apprehended and appreciated, for if animals can’t
know and enjoy beauty precisely because they have only senses, it follows that man can’t conceive
or enjoy beauty through his senses ( the “ brutish part”).
It is evident that, for Shaftesbury, erotic art, which is all about presenting desirable bodies and
stirring up sensual pleasures, can have no legitimate place within the realm of the aesthetic. Yet,
apart from a brief passage in which he denounces the “ self- improving artist” who makes a fortune
by “ studying bodies” ( 1964: 144), Shaftesbury does not explicitly criticize or attack any kind of art
or artist. ( Like Kant, his primary focus is not art, but beauty.) Someone who does explicitly take
up such a critical stance, however, is Arthur Schopenhauer. If Shaftesbury is the philosopher who
inspired Kant to develop the theory of disinterestedness, then Schopenhauer is the philosopher
who, inspired by Kant, has taken this notion of disinterestedness and worked it up into a fully
fledged philosophy of art.
This is not the place to discuss all the minutiae of Schopenhauer’s The World as Will and Representation
( 1818). Crucial, for our purposes, is his concept of “ das Reizende,” which will here be
translated as “ the stimulating.” The stimulating is “ that which excites the will by directly presenting
to it satisfaction, fulfillment” ( Schopenhauer 1969: 207). It ought to be shunned at all price in
art, says Schopenhauer, because it
draws the beholder down from pure contemplation, demanded by every apprehension of
the beautiful, since it necessarily stirs his will by objects that directly appeal to it. Thus the
Hans Maes
42
beholder no longer remains pure subject of knowing, but becomes the needy and dependent subject of willing.
(1969:207)
This is contrary to the aim of art, which is to facilitate w ill- less contemplation of the Ideas.
Schopenhauer is quite specific about what the stimulating consists in: “ In historical painting and in sculpture ( it) consists in nude figures, the position, semi- drapery, and whole treatment of which are calculated to excite lustful feeling in the beholder” ( 1969: 2 07– 2 08). It is important to note that he does not object to depicting the nude figure as such – after all, the ancients did so “ almost always free from … fault” ( 1969: 2 07– 2 08). What he objects to is a particular treatment of the nude, one which is designed to excite lustful feelings in the beholder. In other words, what he targets and denounces is erotic art. Like Shaftesbury and Kant, he is drawn to make a comparison with food. Fruit is admissible as a subject matter for paintings “ for it exhibits itself as a further development of the flower, and as a beautiful product of nature through form and colour, without our being positively forced to think of its edibility” ( 1969: 207– 2 08). But what is not admissible are prepared and s erved- up dishes, depicted with a high degree of realism. Dutch still life paintings depicting oysters, herrings, crabs, bread, butter, beer, wine excite the appetite and are objectionable for the exact same reasons as erotic paintings and sculptures, which excite sexual appetite, are objectionable: they stimulate the will and as such put an end to any aesthetic contemplation of the object. Given that the function of art is to facilitate aesthetic experience, it follows for Schopenhauer that “ the stimulating... is everywhere to be avoided in art” ( 1969: 208; see also Neill 2012).
3 The Legacy of Modern Aesthetics
Modern aesthetics has cast a long shadow into the 20th and even the 21st century, and the idea that the aesthetic and the erotic are fundamentally incompatible has proved to be very influential throughout.
Clive Bell, the great champion of aesthetic formalism, inscribes himself neatly in that tradition. In his landmark book, Art ( 1914), he begins by drawing a sharp contrast between the aesthetic emotion, which is provoked by works of art in virtue of a certain pleasing combination of lines and colors, and sexual feelings and desires which are provoked by sensually appealing bodies. The two could not be more different, he thinks:
Let no one imagine, because he has made merry in the warm tilth and quaint nooks of ro-mance, that he can even guess at the austere and thrilling raptures of those who have climbed the cold, white peaks of art.
(1961:42)
Nevertheless, Bell acknowledges, as did Shaftesbury, that the two emotions are often confused partly because in everyday speech the word “ beauty” is used indiscriminately for items that fall in each of the two categories ( beautiful works of art, attractive men and women). To prevent any further confusion, he insists therefore on using the word “ significant form,” instead of beauty, for the combination of lines and colors that produces the aesthetic emotion. ( Shaftesbury, one will recall, was revisionist in the opposite direction, refusing to employ the word beauty for that which is merely desirable.)
What about those works of art that appeal to our sensual feelings and desires and that are so popular with the man in the street?
Erotic
Art and the Nude
43
The art that they call ‘ beautiful’ is generally closely related to the women. A beautiful picture
is a photograph of a pretty girl; beautiful music, the music that provokes emotions similar to
those provoked by young ladies in musical farces; and beautiful poetry, the poetry that recalls
the same emotions felt, twenty years earlier, for the rector’s daughter.
(1961: 28–29)
Bell has no patience with ignorant folks who seek out pictures, poems, or music for these reasons.
They are simply confusing the sensual and the aesthetic.
For Bell and his fellow formalists, significant form is the only important artistic criterion.
Where it comes to insulating the aesthetic from the erotic, many prominent philosophers in the
20th century have followed in Bell’s footsteps, even when they do not subscribe to his formalism.
In The Principles of Art ( 1938), R. G. Collingwood observes how “ the words ‘ beauty,’ ‘ beautiful,’
as actually used, have no aesthetic implication” since they often indicate “ the satisfaction of some
desire or the arousing of some emotion” ( 1938: 3 8– 4 1). For Collingwood, a beautiful man or
woman ordinarily means one whom we find sexually desirable. And he firmly states that this “ has
nothing whatever to do with aesthetic experience. It has to do with that other kind of experience
that Plato called eros” ( 1938: 41). Similarly, Monroe Beardsley insisted on a strict divide between
the two sorts of responses and revised his theory of aesthetic experience when it was pointed out
to him that it did not exclude sexual experiences from the realm of the aesthetic ( Beardsley 1982).
Edward Bullough famously posited “ psychical distance” as a prerequisite for experiencing art
and concluded that “ explicit references to organic affections, … especially to sexual matters, lie
normally below the D istance- l imit, and can be touched on by Art only with special precautions”
(1969: 403).
Even in the 21st century, one will find philosophers who are deeply skeptical about the aesthetic
and artistic potential of the erotic. Mohan Matthen, for instance, states that “ erotic art tends not to
be great art” because “ even when erotica are artistic … they have too direct an effect on sexual response,
and this distracts the viewer’s attention away from the work itself ” ( 2011: 354). The more
erotic a work of art, the more difficult it is to appreciate aesthetically. Matthen makes this claim
in an essay review of The Art Instinct ( 2009), a book on evolutionary aesthetics written by Denis
Dutton, who also claims that eroticism is best avoided in art, though for different reasons than
Matthen. While the latter considers the sexual response too distracting, Dutton argues that it is
rather too crude and too basic to count as a proper aesthetic response. A high degree of m eaningcomplexity
is the hallmark of all great art, according to Dutton, but while love is complex, “[s]
ex itself is just too simple” ( 2009: 238). As a consequence, “ love is the most pervasive theme for
representative arts everywhere, [whereas] explicit eroticism does not tend to figure importantly
in the greatest masterpieces” ( 2009: 238). Just like a bowl of corn syrup and a plate of sugar will
never be dinner, Dutton flippantly observes, erotic paintings and sculptures will never qualify as
art of the highest order. ( It is certainly noteworthy that Dutton, who is the antipode of modern
aesthetics in doing away with the very notion of a disinterested pleasure and assuming that matters
of sexual reproduction are vital in explaining our interest in art and aesthetics, actually finds
himself in the company of Schopenhauer, Kant, and Shaftesbury where erotic art is concerned.)
To recapitulate: if ( disinterested, contemplative) aesthetic responses are indeed irreconcilable
with ( interested, bodily) sexual responses, as so many philosophers of art in the past have thought,
then there hardly remains any conceptual space for works that aim for both kinds of response. Yet,
we do, as a matter of fact, have this longstanding tradition of erotic art, not just in the West but
also in many non- Western cultures. How to account for this?
Proponents of modern aesthetics could simply bite the bullet here and argue, as Mohan Matthen
does, that erotic art tends not to be great art, or, following Bell, that erotic paintings can
only attain art status in spite of their erotic content. But that is a big bullet to bite, by any standard.
Hans
Maes
44
Not only are there so many outstanding works of erotic art, but the eroticism of these works is also more often than not an integral part of their status and value as art. To be sure, there are nude paintings and sculptures which seem to qualify first and foremost as studies in formal beauty. But anyone who would regard, say, the Rokeby Venus by Velázquez ( c. 1 647– 1 651) or Philip Golub Reclining by Silvia Sleigh ( 1971) as a mere formal exercise would entirely misunderstand and fail to appreciate what these works are about. That is why the great majority of aestheticians today prefer the other horn of the dilemma. Instead of denying the existence of genuinely erotic art, they will deny that aesthetic and erotic responses are antithetical and hence reject the basic tenets of modern aesthetics.
4 The Aesthetic Rehabilitation of the Erotic
Modern aesthetics and its 2 0th- century formalist and experientialist heirs have come under attack from many sides. But instead of offering a general critique, let us consider briefly some of the philosophers who, in attacking modern aesthetics, have explicitly pleaded for the inclusion of the sexual within the domain of aesthetics.
One of the most vehement early critics was Friedrich Nietzsche. In an o ft- quoted passage in On the Genealogy of Morals ( 1887), Nietzsche shifts attention to the artist’s point of view to reveal a fundamental flaw in modern aesthetics: “ When our aestheticians tirelessly rehearse, in support of Kant’s view, that the spell of beauty enables us to view even nude female statues ‘ disinterestedly’ we may be allowed to laugh a little at their expense. The experiences of artists in this delicate mat-ter are rather more ‘ interesting’; certainly Pygmalion was not entirely devoid of aesthetic feeling” ( Nietzsche 1956: III.6).
Pygmalion fell under the spell of the beautiful statue he had created, but his enjoyment was cer-tainly not bereft of any desire. For Nietzsche, the case of Pygmalion is not exceptional, but rather emblematic: “ All art works tonically, increases strength, inflames desire” ( 1968b: §809). And, as he writes in Twilight of the Idols ( 1889), “ all beauty incites to procreation – … precisely this is the proprium of its effect, from the most sensual regions up into the most spiritual…” ( 1968a: IX.22). To believe, as Schopenhauer, Kant, Shaftesbury seem to have done, that in matters of beauty and art there is such a thing as “ immaculate perception” ( an aesthetic regard pure of any desire) is simply to deceive oneself.
Within contemporary aesthetics, both Alexander Nehamas and Richard Shusterman have made a serious and sustained effort to make room for the erotic within aesthetics and art. In the first few pages of his book Only a Promise of Happiness ( 2007), Nehamas lays his cards on the table. Mentioning Kant and Schopenhauer as his adversaries, he states uncompromisingly that “ the only reaction ap-propriate to beauty is eros – l ove, the desire to possess it” ( 2007: 6). While eros should not necessarily be understood in a sexual sense here, Nehamas does think that erotic encounters provide an instruc-tive model for aesthetic experiences in general: “ The most abstract and intellectual beauty provokes the urge to possess it no less than the most sensual inspires the passion to come to know it better” ( 2007: 7). Each judgment of beauty is future oriented, is identical with the spark of desire, and contains, in the words of Stendhal, a promise of happiness ( Stendhal 1926: 74; Nehamas 2007: 55).
For Nehamas, too, erotic art is not at all a recalcitrant exception in need of explanation. Quite the contrary, it offers the best possible inroad to understanding what beauty and art are all about. It’s not a coincidence that the touchstone work of art, to which Nehamas returns again and again, is Manet’s Olympia. Far from being an exercise in formal beauty, this is a painting that is precisely designed “ to jolt the audience, especially the men, into acknowledging that what they were enjoy-ing was not a painted canvas or an idealized figure with an edifying message but a naked woman of their own place and time” ( 2007: 27). It is erotic in every sense of the word, forever sparking the audience’s d esire – as all great art should do.
Erotic Art and the Nude
45
If Nehamas mainly takes issue with the disavowal of desire within modern aesthetics, Richard
Shusterman’s main target is the “ i dealist- r ationalist repugnance for the body” which he finds is
permeating the entire tradition of Western philosophy ( 2005: 324). To counter this, Shusterman
proposes a new discipline, “ somaesthetics,” which aims to study the body as a locus of s ensoryaesthetic
appreciation and which has as one of its main subsidiary ambitions to “( i) mprove our
appreciation of the artistry, beauty, meaning that sexual experience can offer” ( 2008: 85). In
several of his essays, he argues that sexual experience itself can qualify as an aesthetic experience,
since most of the crucial features attributed to aesthetic experiences are also attributable to erotic
experiences: they are pursued and valued for their own sake, they are rich in intensity and stand
out distinctively from the flow of ordinary humdrum experience, they display harmonies of structure
and developing form, they are being subjectively savored but also intentionally directed at an
object, they deeply engage thought, feeling, and imagination, and stimulate both body and mind
( 2007: 57; 2008: 93). Hence, instead of ignoring or disenfranchising the tradition of erotic art,
Shusterman pleads for the reassertion of an “ ars erotica” which would not just involve a renewed
attention for certain works of the past, but would entail the development of genuine erotic art
forms that could help increase our understanding of the relation between aesthetics and sex ( 2007:
57). Other philosophers have since followed suit and continued the rehabilitation of the body and
the erotic within aesthetics ( e.g. Irvin 2016).
5 The Erotic vs. the Pornographic
Scholars who write about erotic art are often quite anxious to draw a strict dividing line between
“ high- brow” erotic art and “ low- b row” pornography ( Maes 2012). The eminent art historian
Kenneth Clark notoriously stated to the Longford Committee Investigating Pornography: “ To
my mind art exists in the realm of contemplation... the moment art becomes an incentive to action
it loses its true character” ( 1972: 280). This was his main objection to pornography: that it was
in essence an incentive to sexual acts. However, as a justification for the radical separation of art
and pornography this will not do. For one thing, Clark seems to overlook the fact that there are
numerous religious or politically inspired masterpieces that call on people to change their lives or
perform certain actions ( Delacroix’s Liberty Leading the People, 1830, comes to mind).
Erotic art, according to Roger Scruton, relies on suggestion and, instead of focusing on certain
body parts, will try to capture the individuality, personality, and subjectivity of the represented
person. In Titian’s Venus of Urbino ( 1538), for instance, it is not the sexual organs but the face, as
“ window to the soul,” that provides the focus of attention ( 2009: 149). A pornographic image, by
contrast, “ is like a magic wand that turns subjects into objects, people into things – and thereby
disenchants them, destroying the source of their beauty” ( 2009: 163). As part of his project to
rehabilitate beauty as the central aesthetic and artistic category, Scruton also appeals to the distinction
between “ the nude” and “ the naked” made famous by Kenneth Clark ( 1956). The artistic
nude constitutes, as the subtitle of Clark’s book indicates, a “ Study in Ideal Form”: the body is
beautifully shaped and framed by the conventions of art. The people in pornographic images are
not nude, but naked. They are deprived of clothes, and as such exposed in an embarrassing way.
However, when Scruton praises the s elf- a ssured way in which the Venus of Urbino looks directly
at the spectator, thereby signaling that she possesses her own body in a confident way instead of
just being an object on display, he conveniently disregards other masterpieces by Titian, such as
Venus and Adonis ( 1554) and Danaë ( 1544– 1545), where quite the opposite is true. Furthermore,
some commentators have argued, pace Scruton, that it is “ the nude” and not “ the naked” which
implies objectification and dehumanization. According to John Berger, “ to be naked is to be
oneself,” whereas a naked body has to be seen as an object on display for the spectator in order to
become a “ nude” ( Berger 1972: 54; see also Hammer 1997).
Hans Maes
46
Perhaps pornography is harmful in a way that erotic art is not? We know that harm may occur in the making of pornography, and take the form of coercion, brutality, violence, or rape. But even if no harm takes place in the production phase, and models are treated fairly and with re-spect, there can still be p ost- p roduction harms. Some have argued that the pornographic materials themselves constitute harm because, as a form of hate speech, they silence and subordinate women ( MacKinnon 1987, Langton 2009). Others have emphasized that exposure to pornographic ma-terial may cause harm ( Eaton 2007). By systematically eroticizing aspects of gender inequality, so- called inegalitarian pornography is thought to cause harm to a third party, in particular women, through the pernicious effect it has on its consumers ( Eaton 2007).
But could the same not be said of certain works or kinds of erotic art? First, harm may be in-flicted when erotic art is being produced ( Brown ( 2002) tells the harrowing story of Cellini and the Nymph of Fontainebleau). Second, some erotic art may also constitute harm. At least, Langton and MacKinnon’s arguments seem to carry over seamlessly to ( certain strands of) erotic art. One of the difficult questions for Langton and MacKinnon – do pornographers possess the appropri-ate authority to perform the speech acts of silencing and subordinating women? – appears even easier to answer in the affirmative in the case of artists since their perceived authority is much less contentious. Third, some erotic art may cause harm in the same way as pornography, that is, by eroticizing aspects of gender inequality and thus shaping people’s sexual preferences in such a way that sustains the current inequality between genders ( Eaton 2012).
“ Objectification” is a term that is often used to describe what is wrong with pornography. Mar-tha Nussbaum ( 1995), for instance, has written a seminal essay on different forms of objectification and how they apply to pornography. However, a detailed case is made by Eaton ( 2012) that objec-tification is not unique to pornography and is present in many works of erotic art – a p resence that is frequently unacknowledged precisely because critics tend to focus exclusively on pornography and too often consider art to be above ( moral) criticism. Eaton ( 2012) also offers a philosophical re- i nterpretation of the influential but strongly psychoanalytically informed concept of the “ male gaze” ( Mulvey 1989). To say that a work embodies the male gaze, Eaton suggests, is simply to say that it prescribes that its audience perceives the woman represented as primarily a sex object. And:
To describe this “ way of seeing” as “ male” is not to claim anything about how all, or even most, men respond to such pictures; rather, it is to note that this is the “ way of seeing” proper to someone in the masculine social role, a role which, it should be noted, is avowedly heterosexual.
( Eaton 2012: 293)
In a response to Eaton’s paper, Lavallee ( 2016) has drawn attention to the different ways in which non- white women are objectified in a rt – s omething which has often remained unacknowledged in the scholarly literature. Finally, one should consider differences in artistic media and social class in distinguishing between erotic art and pornography. For instance, Adil Mustafa Ahmad notes in relation to Islamic art that “ practically all that is perceived as erotic ( acceptable, sublime) when described in literature is seen as pornographic ( o ff- p utting and vulgar) if projected in painting and sculpture” ( Ahmad 1994: 281). In Western art, too, there appear to be different degrees of permis-sibility depending on the medium that is used. While Giulio Romano’s sexually explicit drawings and paintings were collected and revered as art, the print run that Marcantonio Raimondi made of those works, known as I Modi ( 1524), was reviled and all but destroyed by the censors. What made such erotic representations exceed the boundaries of acceptability, Eaton ( 2018) suggest, was not its extreme libidinosity but, rather, its widespread availability and, thereby, its threat to one of the mechanisms of sustaining class privilege.
Erotic Art and the Nude
47
References
Ahmad, Adil Mustafa. 1994. ‘The Erotic and the Pornographic in Arab Culture’. British Journal of Aesthetics,
Vol. 34, pp. 278– 284.
Aki, Ishigami. 2013. ‘The
Reception of Shunga in the Modern Era: From Meiji to the Pre- WWII
Years’.
Japan Review, Vol. 26, pp. 37– 55.
Beardsley, Monroe C. 1982. ‘Redefining Art’. In Wreen, Michael J. & Callen, Donald M. (eds.).
The Aesthetic Point of View. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, pp. 298–316.
Bell, Clive. 1961. Art. London: Grey Arrow.
Berger, John. 1972. Ways of Seeing. London: Penguin.
Brown, Curtis. 2002. ‘Art,
Oppression, and the Autonomy of Aesthetics.’ In Neill, Alex & Ridley, Aaron
(eds.). Arguing About Art: Contemporary Philosophical Debates. London: Routledge.
Bullough, Edward. 1969. ‘Psychical Distance’. In Tillman, F. & Cahn, S. M. (eds.).
Philosophy of Art and
Aesthetics. New York: Harper & Row.
Clark, Kenneth. 1956. The Nude: A Study in Ideal Beauty. London: John Murray.
Collingwood, R. G. 1938. The Principles of Art. Oxford: Clarendon.
Dutton, Denis. 2009. The Art Instinct. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eaton, A. W. 2007. ‘A
Sensible Anti-
Porn Feminism’. Ethics, Vol. 117, pp. 674–
715.
Eaton, A. W. 2012. ‘What’s Wrong with the Female Nude? A Feminist Perspective on Art and Pornography’. In Maes, Hans & Levinson, Jerrold (eds.).
Art and Pornography: Philosophical Essays. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Eaton, A. W. 2018. ‘‘A
Lady on the Street but a Freak in the Bed’: On the Distinction between Erotic Art
and Pornography’. The British Journal of Aesthetics, Vol. 58(4),
pp. 469–
488.
Hammer, Martin. 1997. The Naked Portrait. Edinburgh: The National Galleries of Scotland.
Irvin, Sherri. (ed.)
2016. Body Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kant, Immanuel. 2000. Critique of the Power of Judgment. (Ed. Paul Guyer, trans. Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Langton, Rae. 2009. Sexual Solipsism. Philosophical Essays on Pornography and Objectification. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Lavallee, Zoey. 2016. ‘What’s Wrong with the (White) Female Nude?’ Estetyka i Krytyka, Vol. 41, pp. 77– 98.
Levinson, Jerrold. 2006. ‘What
Is Erotic Art?’ In Levinson, Jerrold (eds.).
Contemplating Art. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Longford, F. P. 1972. Pornography: The Longford Report. London: Coronet Books.
MacKinnon, Catharine. 1987. ‘Francis Biddle’s Sister: Pornography, Civil Rights, and Speech’. In Feminism
Unmodified: Discourses on Life and Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Maes, Hans. 2012. ‘Who Says Pornography Can’t Be Art?’. In Maes, Hans & Levinson, Jerrold (eds.).
Art and
Pornography: Philosophical Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Matthen, Mohan. 2011. ‘Art,
Sexual Selection, Group Selection: Critical Notice of The Art Instinct’. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 41, pp. 337– 356.
Mulvey, Laura. 1989. Visual and Other Pleasures. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Nehamas, Alexander. 2007. Only a Promise of Happiness: The Place of Beauty in a World of Art. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Neill, Alex. 2012. ‘The Pornographic, the Erotic, the Charming and the Sublime’. In Maes, Hans & Levinson, Jerrold (eds.).
Art and Pornography: Philosophical Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1956. The Birth of Tragedy and The Genealogy of Morals. (Trans. Francis Golffing). New
York: Doubleday.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1968a. Twilight of the Idols. (Trans. R. J. Hollingdale). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1968b. The Will to Power. (Trans. W. Kaufmann & R. Hollingdale). New York: Vintage Press.
Nussbaum, Martha C. 1995. ‘Objectification’.
Philosophy and Public Affairs, Vol. 24, pp. 249–
291.
Posner, Richard. 1994. Sex and Reason. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. 1969. The World as Will and Representation. Vol. 1. (Trans. E. F. Payne). New York:
Dover Publications.
Scruton, Roger. 2009. Beauty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shaftesbury, Third Earl of. 1964. Characteristics of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times. (Ed. John M. Robertson).
New York: Bobbs Merrill.
Shusterman, Richard. 2005. ‘Somaesthetics and Burke’s Sublime’. British Journal of Aesthetics. Vol. 45,
pp. 323– 341.
Hans Maes
48
Shusterman, Richard. 2007. ‘Asian
Ars Erotica and the Question of Sexual Aesthetics’. Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism. Vol. 65, pp. 55– 68.
Shusterman, Richard. 2008. ‘Aesthetic Experience: From Analysis to Eros’. In Shusterman, Richard &
Tomlin, A. (eds.).
Aesthetic Experience. London: Routledge, pp. 79– 97.
Sircello, Guy. 1979. ‘Beauty and Sex’. In Gustafson, D. F. & Tapscott, B. L. (eds.).
Body, Mind, and Method:
Essays in Honor of Virgil C. Aldrich. Boston: Reidel.
Stendhal. 1926. De l’amour. Paris: Champion.
Webb, Peter. 1975. The Erotic Arts. London: Secker & Warburg.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-7 49
5ON REGARDING DIGITAL ART
Shelby Moser
1 Introduction
It is evident from this volume that the contemporary arts have challenged well- e stablished artistic practices, including ways in which art is produced, curated, and appreciated. Therefore, it should come as little surprise the digital arts yield no exception to this tendency. But whilst transgres-sions against artistic norms create little fractures in the history of art, they also, over time, tend to motivate new ways of appreciating art. This tendency to accept a vant- g arde practices into an established art canon is apparent among even the most experimental of contemporary artworks. However, altogether, the digital art form— as prevalent as digital media has become in and outside of the a rtworld— h as yet to be fully embraced by the fine arts, mainly because it has yet to be adequately understood. This chapter investigates the role digital art has played within the broader context of traditional art appreciation and the challenges it has encountered, and suggests that, like other genres before it, requires a new form of regard.
Before beginning an analysis of digital art, it is worth a brief comment on “ digital art” as a category and to note a few of the taxonomic variations that have emerged since the 20th century. Other related art categories such as “ new media”, “ new genre”, and “ emerging media” share simi-larities with digital art but, in addition to the interchangeability between the categories, the terms themselves cause some ambiguity. For one, digital processing systems have been around for nearly a century so there is nothing necessarily new about some of the media within these categories, nor are there clear points at which certain artworks should be reclassified because their media has become old ( or expired) and are, therefore, no longer emerging. Likewise, it is important to bear in mind that digital art includes works from a broad range of appreciative art practices such as experimental installation, film, literature, music, video, internet art, video games, and more. In short, many different kinds of works utilize digital media in some capacity, either in the making, presenting, or preserving of an artwork. However, if there is any consistency to be found, it is that all such processes require assistance from a computer.
Most simply understood, the digital realm stands in opposition to the analog; digital media relies on a computer processing system that encodes information into a m achine- r eadable format, or the 1s and 0s commonly referred to as binary code. Artists have used digital technologies as artistic tools since the 1950s to help generate works like A. Michael Noll’s Gaussian-Quadratic ( 1963). But it is worth noting that while these sorts of computer- generated images originally garnered a curiosity for h uman- like capabilities of computing machines, they, unknowingly, set a precedent that digital works did not belong in the artworld. Works like Gaussian-Quadratic were Shelby
Moser
50
not necessarily intended, nor were they appreciated as works of fine art, but instead viewed as
creative technological experiments to push computer manufacturing and programming to their
outer limits. Noll himself, an engineer and pioneering digital “ artist”, noted an early aesthetic
limitation of computer- generated works since computers, at the time, merely copied the effects of
traditional media. Noll’s doubts about a computer’s creative abilities are clear with his statement
that computers had “ yet to produce anything approaching entirely new aesthetic experiences”
( Noll 1970: 11). In other words, he found Gaussian-Quadratic to be technologically interesting
from an engineering perspective, but artistically derivative from an aesthetic perspective, specifically
of Cubist works by Picasso.
An early skepticism of a computer’s ability to be artistically innovative was compounded by
other circumstantial factors in the mid- 20th century. For one, during the Cold War, the public
held strong negative associations between the computer and military defense systems, which
synonymized computers, not with art, but with warfare, government control, and espionage. For
another, computers were both inaccessible and unaffordable to general consumers and to the arts;
even if artists gained access to a computer, they often lacked the necessary programming skills to
produce artistic works, including pastiche ones like Gaussian-Quadratic. Noll was, after all, first
and foremost a computer engineer with privileged access to laboratory computers.
While there is nothing digital about the display of Gaussian-Quadratic, it reveals an early tendency
of the artworld to keep c omputer- g enerated works at arm’s length. Digital media has since
become more popular in the arts and, now that digital technology is more accessible, established
art forms such as photography, film, and music welcome the expanding capabilities of digital media
and networked devices. Movies can be created and projected digitally, Medieval illuminated manuscripts
can be digitized for posterity, musical concerts can be live- s treamed from digital devices
at home, and artists can use GUI ( guided user interface) software to create digital works without
any knowledge of computer programming languages. Technology’s far reaches speak to the significant
impact digital media has had, and increasingly continues to have, on the collective arts,
to say nothing of how entrenched digital technology is in our daily lives. However, as pervasive
and accepted as digital technology has become in the production and archival of various artworks,
digital art, as an artform, remains in the margins. To be clear, it is not merely an incorporation of
digital media that classifies something as a work of “ digital art” in any appreciative sense. A digital
film is, after all, appreciated in a more conventional manner qua movie than for any salient digital
features. In this chapter, digital art will be employed to reference artworks that use digital media,
not just in their creation or preservation, but in the presentation, or display of a work. Narrowing our
focus to art that incorporates digital media in this way makes our present task more manageable,
but the category remains relatively broad. Consider the following three examples.
Les Immatériaux ( 1985) was the first computer exhibition held at the. Among other projects,
artists and intellectuals, including Continental philosophers J ean- François Lyotard and
Jacques Derrida, collaborated on a writing project which, by participating from computers
in their own homes, and before the existence of email, would appear on a single computer
monitor housed inside the museum.
Walter Benjamin: The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction ( 1998) is an example of
Net.art, otherwise known as online or Internet art. This work, created anonymously, features
a website page of words and numbers that flash so quickly, the user is unable to identify what
they are reading. At the bottom of the screen, a note from the artist reads “ a translation meant
for readers who do not understand the original”1, a clear commentary on the ever- i ncreasing
speed of reproducibility of art in the digital age, since Benjamin’s famous essay in 1936 on the
age of mechanical reproduction. Net art is distinctive of m useum- based works because they can
be accessed remotely, by many users at once, and wholly outside of the museum.
On
Regarding Digital Art
51
The Rock where People Gather ( where People Gather, hereafter) ( 2018) is an example of an
interactive, immersive digital installation. Where People Gather “ is reproduced in a virtual
three- dimensional space. Water is simulated to fall onto the rock, and the flow of the water
draws the shape of the waterfall. The water is represented by a continuum of numerous water
particles and the interaction between the particles is then calculated. Lines are drawn in relation
to the behavior of the water particles. The lines are then “ flattened” using what teamLab
considers to be ultrasubjective space.
When a person stands on the rock or touches the waterfall, they too become like a rock
that changes the flow of water. The flow of water continues to transform in real time due
to the interaction of people. Previous visual states can never be replicated, and will never
reoccur.
(TeamLab 2018)
The first two examples are loosely attributed to one of three digital transformations that have
occurred thus far. The final example points to a potential fourth transformation currently in
progress. Computer- g enerated images, such as the aforementioned Gaussian-Quadratic, became
a possibility during the first digital transformation with the emergence of the first lab- b ased
computers. A second digital transformation is marked by a shift from the lab to commercial
world, which made personal computers common in the 1980s and allowed for the production
of digitally displayed images such as those famously created by Gilbert & George. A third digital
transformation introduced networked computers with the emergence of the Internet in the 1990s,
which allowed for art’s connectivity and mobility. Technology has continued to improve upon
the capabilities of the computer, giving us immersive works such as where People Gather. This latter
example gives credence to the claim that we are currently undergoing a fourth transformation
with an ever increasing blend between our physical spaces with virtual objects and environments
( Florid 2010: 12).
The combined developments from these transformations have shown the artworld that digital
media can produce new aesthetic effects and experiences, not merely copy those of older media.
But, to reiterate, new media sometimes requires new ways of appreciating art. When a work of art
consists of digital features, it is important that we not only understand a display’s formal features
but also how those features behave. That brings us to the primary objective of this chapter, which
is to explore the ways in which digital art has been perceived in the past and to take a deeper
look at the unique capabilities of digital media. Section 2 analyzes the materiality of digital art,
which, significantly, mostly comprises immaterial media. Although immaterial art is common in
other art forms, it is not so typical among the plastic arts. Section 3 considers how space factors in
our appreciation of digital art and presents a number of ways in which the customs of a museum
might inappropriately condition the viewer to regard digital art, as though it were a painting or
sculpture. Section 4 summarizes the ways in which digital art has been broadly categorized in the
past and suggests digital art needs a new form of regard; unlike most plastic art forms, it is a digital
artwork’s behavior that should come to the foreground.
2 The Materiality of Digital Art
Every art form takes advantage of a specific medium or media, which, in turn, means an artwork
cannot always be separated from its materiality. As characterized by New Media curator
Michael Rush, “[with] painting or sculpture, it is the concepts and uses of materials that change
in the art. With t echnology- based art, the medium itself radically changes when the technology
changes” ( Rush 2005: 193). If sculpture makes some sort of critical commentary about the clay,
bronze, or other sculptural substance it comprises, digital art relies on ever changing capabilities
Shelby
Moser
52
of algorithms, programming languages, software, and the affordances they bear, not to mention the necessary hardware required for proper instantiation.
Just as experimental materials like rope, latex, and newspaper challenged the privileges of paint and clay, digital technology continues to challenge the ( predominantly static) object- h ood of the plastic arts. But there is a difference in how digital media is perceived compared to the physical media that continues to dominate. The perceptual features of digital artworks are merely the ef-fects of the media, which are generated by algorithms, programming languages, and layers of data and instructions that perform specific functions. But these media are not typically encountered firsthand by the viewer.2 For example, although we have a potential to perceive the digital water particles moving from place to place in where People Gather, the algorithms and programming lan-guages that generate those features function internally.
Since digital media is not physical in any traditional sense, neither are digital images fixed to a single location.3 A culmination of digital “ materials” mentioned above allows for one of the foremost features typically associated with digital artworks, their transmissibility. In other words, digital technology allows information ( the work) to be stored, accessed, and instantiated from more than one location, where each accessed instance is, in principle, authentic. An ability to transmit data in this way is remarkable because, historically, philosophical aesthetics and, indeed the artworld, have focused on the plastic arts as commodifiable, singular, unique objects, yet, the transmissible nature of digital media allows some art to be replicable, immaterial, and mobile. Such features further challenge an enduring reliance on art and rarity. Although the transmissible nature of digital works makes it more troublesome for them to fully assimilate in the traditional artworld, it also minimizes their need to assimilate, a point I will return to in the final section of this chapter.
It is unsuitable to discuss digital art at any length before discussing another key feature, their potential for interactivity. Whilst not all digital works are interactive, interactivity has increas-ingly become a standard feature since computers are, by default, interactive machines. Interac-tivity marks a point of departure from digital images like those created by Gilbert & George, but there is precedence in earlier art forms. In discussing his interactive work from 1920, Rotary Glass Plates ( Precision Optics), Marcel Duchamp characterized the significance of viewer interactivity because, unlike n on- interactive works, they rely on viewers to “ complete” them. In other words, whilst many artworks prescribe a level of viewer participation, interactive artworks prescribe users to alter a work’s display features. For example, Duchamp’s e lectro- m echanical piece prescribes users to flip a switch to set the glass plates into rotation. Such an example makes it clear that the digital age did not initiate interactive art, but there is perhaps no other medium that has so greatly inspired the kind of philosophical inquiry currently occurring across a broad range of disciplinary fields. This is largely because, more significantly than works like (PrecisionOptics), interactive dig-ital works mainly require users to instance the works themselves, not just certain features of them.
Transmissibility and interactivity are paragon features of many digital artworks, but, while they pose no real problem for the arts in and of themselves, there is a theoretical tension with the combination of the two features because traditionally, a given work is constituted by a single, fixed display type. Unlike static works, the displays of interactive digital artworks are “ customizable” and “ dynamic” because the sounds, sights, and environments of the work can change numerous times depending upon the user’s input, forcing a work to appear much different over the course of time ( Paul 2008). Since interactive works prescribe users to change their d isplay— to varying degrees— t here is no single correct display type, but multiple correct display types, and each dis-play type consists of their own constituent displays.4 Although a concept of multiple display types and differing displays preserves a well- e mbraced philosophical t ype- t oken distinction, it also re-veals that interactive works do not consist of a traditional single, fixed display type, an aspect of their immaterial nature that further marginalizes them from the norms of the plastic arts.
On
Regarding Digital Art
53
3 Digital Art & Space
A central achievement of early contemporary art was to contest the physical parameters of the
museum space, as well as m useum- oriented items such as frames and pedestals, features that customarily
demarcate artistic objects from everything else that surrounds them. Following Rosalind
Kraus, Jason Gaiger says, “ for modernist sculpture the pedestal fulfilled a similar function to the
frame insofar as it marked the separation of the sculptural object from its environment, allowing
the work to be apprehended as ‘ functionally placeless and largely self- r eferential’”( Gaiger 2009:
53). This sort of demarcation does not disappear altogether with contemporary a rt— consider, for
example, the plexiglass that encases outlier works like Koons’ vacuum cleaners at M oMA— but,
pedestals and frames are less commonly needed with digital artworks because their effects are not
as bound to specific locations as are physical objects. Nevertheless, the museum is the most prevalent
site for aesthetic appreciation and if frames and pedestals help to distinguish artworks from
the ordinary world, it is easy to comprehend why their absences from digital art can lead to some
confusion about what the work is and what it prescribes of the user.
One customary feature that continues to accompany digital art is the traditional museum label,
which, interestingly enough, is commonly referred to as an object label. Objecthood notwithstanding,
museum labels normally default to traditional standards, which, for digital art, can make them
overly technical and laborious to read. For example, while a list of materials for, let us say, a collage
by Rauschenberg or performance by Joseph Beuys can be useful for a better appreciation of certain
experimental works, such content is usually less relevant for works of digital art. Consider the label
for Grahame Weinbren and Roberta Friedman’s digital artwork entitled The Erl King:
Interactive installation with code, reproduced video, and duplicable hardware and materials:
SONY computer ca.2004, bitmapped video frames, PASCAL source code and Java interpreter,
two monitors, two speakers, and wood and cardboard construction
( Ippolito 2008: 121)
This sort of information is rarely useful to the average appreciator of museum art. On its own, a
lengthy list of sponsors and incorporated digital media and hardware says nothing of the work’s
functionality and behavior, which would help users better understand that a digital work is more
than the technology it comprises ( Ippolito 2008: 121). Because museum labeling systems typically
rely on traditional curatorial practices, they condition viewers to appreciate interactive digital art
in a similar manner as a painting, but with less effective outcomes.
Net art does not rely on indoor museum space for exhibition, but m useum- o riented artworks
like where People Gather are often displayed in a more traditional custom because, although comprising
digital, transmissible media, gallery- d riven works can be controlled by an artist ( or collective),
so viewers can only access the work from a single location at limited times, much like traditional
objects. This brings location to the foreground because, to a degree, all digital works, including
net art and museum installations, are s ite- specific, but their specificity functions very differently
than many traditional site- s pecific works. Although the meaning of site- s pecificity is not entirely
decided upon, it is typically understood that s ite- specific works are created for a particular location
or certain kinds of qualifying token locations that usually extend beyond the museum walls. It is
in this respect that space and location become an appreciative feature and medium. Likewise, a
specificity of place is often important for many digital works because, at a minimal level, successful
instantiations of digital installations depend upon the physical spaces that determine information
like the work’s brightness and dimensions. Because digital media are customizable, works can be
reconfigured for different spaces to maintain correct appearances, a feature that contrasts with paradigmatic
s ite- s pecific works such as Spiral Jetty ( Smithson 1970) or Tilted Arch (Serra
1981–
1989).
Shelby Moser
54
More significantly, digital installations depend upon space because they comprise both material and theoretical spaces, where physical places are connected to virtual ones. But relating the vir-tual realm to the physical is a complicated task. When virtual reality was less prevalent, the term itself tended to characterize objects, environments, relationships, and currencies, among others, as things that are less legitimate than their physical counterparts. Virtual technologies have since progressed in both capability and affordability, which has given the public greater exposure to the effects of virtual reality than was possible decades past. Our conceptions of the virtual have thus shifted, at least to a degree, because we no longer tend to view things like virtual libraries, curren-cies, and games any less significantly, effectively, or predominantly than physical ones.
However, there is some discrepancy about the degree to which we might appreciate the gen-uineness of virtual art objects in comparison with physical art objects. A broader implication is usually cashed out in this w ay— we perceive virtual objects as fictional and illusory, or, in the words of David Chalmers, “ as if X but not X” ( Chalmers 2017: 312); this conception often de-values digital objects in comparison to physical objects, which means the former may yield less genuine aesthetic experiences. The immateriality of Les Immateriaux, for example, initially caused confusion about how c omputer- g enerated works were intended to be appreciated because, once the project was complete, nothing of the individual works remained in any perceptual state. Con-sequently, people began to question what, exactly, were the commodifiable features of such works and if they even belonged in the museum alongside the plastic arts in the first place ( it is more customary, after all, to discuss the ephemeral nature of the performing arts). The immateriality of early computer art, including fax performances, telephone concerts, and the like, is largely why such little historical attention was given to digital art when it was in its infancy, and why there is still much ground to cover retrospectively ( Rush 2005: 213).
However, the way we experience digital objects may change depending on our level of famil-iarity with the media. Chalmers argues that “ visual experience may alter for experienced users of [virtual reality]” and the more sophisticated we become in interpreting virtual objects, the more distinctive our phenomenology of such objects becomes ( Chalmers 2017: 331). With a similar statement, digital curator Christiane Paul says, “[n]ew media art requires media literacy” ( Paul 2008: 5). The points that Chalmers and Paul make lead us to the central objective of this chapter, which is that if digital art is to be adequately appreciated, then they require a different manner of appreciation than what the contemporary arts have produced thus far.
4 A New Form of Regard
The interplay between digital art and technology is undeniable and it is one of the central issues among ongoing challenges between digital art and museum- oriented practices. Although histori-cally, technology has been more broadly associated with STEM disciplines than with the arts, one has only to think of Stonehenge or the Great Pyramids of Gizeh to acknowledge that technol-ogy, in some capacity, has been incorporated into artistic practices for centuries. But a successful merger between digital media ( as a display) and the artworld requires, at the very least, an array of technical and artistic understanding among artists, curators, and viewers.
To grant museum patrons greater exposure to art and technology, curators have increasingly begun to incorporate digital art into their exhibitions. The Whitney, for example, installed a number of computers so guests could access certain works of net art in the museum environment, but the endeavor was met with varying responses. For one, museum- g oers found the desktops to be both temperamental and unsightly in comparison with the surrounding works of fine art. For another, curators and museum staff noted a tendency among museum guests to use the laptops for surfing the net rather than appreciating art ( Baumgartel et al. 2008: 2 33– 250). More to the point made in the first section of this chapter, net art can be easily accessed from any other location
On Regarding Digital Art
55
( including from our smartphones on the Metro, for example) and in its own media ( the Internet),
which further highlights a redundancy of the museum for certain digital artworks.5
Gallery- based works have encountered their share of setbacks as well. Another initial tendency
that continues to frustrate our attempts at digital art appreciation today has to do with the specific
features we tend to focus on. Often times, successful digital works of art direct our attention to
the technological features qua impressive technology, rather than as artistic achievements. Alternatively,
when there is a failure with a work, it is not always clear whether the failure is from artistic
reasons, or from problems with the technology, or the display environment, or some combination
thereof. Once again, Les Immateriaux is a good case in point. The included computer installation
SOUND = SPACE, contributed by artist Rolf Gehlhaar, suffered from overheating due to practical
challenges of the museum’s infrastructure. Being the first exhibition of its kind, the Pompidou
was not prepared to provide sufficient supplies of electricity or ventilation that such an endeavor
required ( Cook 2008: 26). Of course, digital technology is more pervasive today than it was in
1985 and museums are now better equipped to handle works like SOUND = SPACE. However,
as technology develops at an exponential rate, so too do the financial demands of museums. The
rapid nature of technology’s evolution also raises questions about how to correctly handle older
digital works whose media has since expired.
Overtime, practical issues like those mentioned above will continue to work themselves out.
That being so, our difficulty to embrace the digital arts to the degree we have embraced other
contemporary art forms has perhaps never been chiefly about the works or infrastructure per se,
but about the manner in which we regard them.
Initially, digital art was perceived as a form of conceptual art, an idea propounded by Lucy
Lippard in the 1970s due to computer art’s immaterial nature.6 While a conceptual characterization
might be truer of virtual text- based works created in a time when computers were relatively
limited in their perceptual capabilities, or of contemporary digital works that are straightforwardly
conceptual, it misses the mark for a digital category as a whole. After all, in addition to
the theoretical features of digital art are the perceptual properties that tend to be elevated to much
stronger degrees than what is standard of a conceptual art category. In other words, the immaterial
and ephemeral nature of digital media is not enough to classify digital art as conceptual, even if
the final product is not predominantly o bject- based.
As digital technology has progressed, philosophers have suggested that, unlike conceptual art,
the interactive nature of many newer digital works, videogames in particular, makes them a kind
of performance art ( Gaut 2010; Tavinor 2017; Kania 2018). A category of performance inches us
nearer to understanding digital art if we consider users to act in a similar manner as, for example,
musicians or dancers, but it still fails to fully emphasize their distinctive nature. As it turns out,
using extant concepts of art appreciation for works of digital art has not necessarily been the best
course of action, which emphasizes, as Jerrold Levinson states, that newer art forms sometimes
require new manners of appreciation ( Levinson 1989, 1993).
So, how should we regard digital art? Our original examples show us that digital artworks vary
in many ways, but a few underlying features, when present, distinguish them from other art forms.
It was stated earlier that digital media is “ dynamic” and “ customizable” ( Paul 2008: 1), which
means, digital art has a behavior. Differently than the “ o ff- o n” option with interactive works like
(Precision Optics), digital media allows works like where People Gather to collect data about users so
their inputs customize the resulting outputs. But in order to understand a work’s behavior, it needs
to be explored, a prescription which becomes s elf- evident if we understand that interactive mechanics
of digital art are often borrowed from videogames, works that require hours upon hours
of playing, exploring, and revisiting. However, exploration in this respect is antithetical to the
standard amount of time a viewer typically spends with any given artwork in a museum, which
some research suggests is no longer than 1 5– 30 seconds ( Smith & Smith 2001).7
Shelby
Moser
56
Greater exploration of a digital work’s function and behavior reveals that the perceived virtual spaces are connected to physical spaces, which make both the virtual and physical locations rele-vant to our understanding of a digital work. The specificity of space is especially true of particular works that incorporate a specific kind of digital media, or media referred to as “ locative- specific”. Locative- specific art is a relatively newer subcategory of interactive digital art; since the term “ locative” pertains to “ location”, we can presume site- s pecificity, once again, plays a significant role in our appreciation of such works and, this time, to a much higher degree. A general concept of locative art can be characterized by Satnav apps accessed on phones, for example, which allow users to perceive a physical location when certain geographical coordinates are applied to virtual, locative media. Since the functions of locative media are connected to actual physical spaces ( or objects), one of the primary interests of locative projects, including locative based art, is the social interactions that result directly from the interactive technology. L ocative- s pecific media inspire projects like where People Gather which communicates algorithmically ( in real time) from social human interaction. New Media scholar, Caroline Basset, roughly defines locative media in this way: “ connecting a position in physical space with a position, or node, in virtual space” ( Bassett 2007: 53). Where Spiral Jetty is a standardly material s ite- specific work and tied to a specific geo-graphic location in Utah with the precise coordinates 41.4377° N, 112.6689° W, digital objects have a similar geographical relationship because they are located at a specific xyz coordinate in virtual space as well as connected to a hardware address that specifies its location in the virtual realm, such as an IP address. In other words, where People Gather is bound to the merged phys-ical and virtual coordinates and, whilst the properties pertaining to virtual water differ from the properties of actual water there is nothing inherently fake about the digital particles or their locations. What is more, the experiences afforded by the social interactions have the potential to be equally rich and genuine as the experiences from physical objects, albeit different. This kind of s ite- s pecificity is unique to s ite- s pecific art and one that warrants more attention from philo-sophical aesthetics.
If not understood properly, digital artworks, particularly interactive digital installations, risk becoming broadly associated with environments of entertainment, or spectacles for social media; the generated aesthetic and perceptual properties of works such as where People Gather verge on the sensational and, if not properly explored, encourage little more than Instagrammers to capture sel-fies within the representational space rather than explore the work to get a clearer understanding of how the artistic and aesthetic merits contribute to its overall meaning.
Exploring a work of digital art improves our understanding because exploration better ac-quaints us with digital objects, just as we typically do in our ordinary lives, as our physical realm becomes more enmeshed with the digital. Instead of perceiving virtual objects as merely illusory, some philosophers suggest we adopt a newer concept, one that stresses virtual objects as genuine, actual objects, not because they are physically real, but because they are virtually real, existing dig-ital objects ( Chalmers 2017). The examples of digital art described at the beginning of this chapter show us that digital interaction can be very real even if the objects and locations are intangible, re-sisting a historical notion that claims proof of existence relies on an object fulfilling perceptibility through the five senses and being “ subject to interaction” ( Floridi 2010: 12, following Aristotle).
In summary, digital artworks should be regarded as mobile, dynamic, customizable, and, es-pecially, behavioral. In order to understand these features, users need to explore the works. Over time, the more familiar users become with digital technology and its effects, the more we will be comfortable with new ways of appreciating a digital work. As technology progresses and our physical realm becomes more and more enmeshed with the virtual, users will have greater creative opportunities to shape the environments they find themselves in and influence social interaction. Over time, it will be interesting to discover the positive and negative consequences of digital technology on our environments, particularly of locative spaces.
On Regarding Digital Art
57
Notes
1 In Rush 2005: 216.
2 To clarify, programing languages are essential for functionality, but everything integral to the ontology
of a w ork- t ype is specified by the algorithm. Due to an algorithm’s significance, interactive digital works
like net art, videogames, and digital installations such as where People Gather, are sometimes appropriately
referred to as ‘ algorithmic art’.
3 I use the phrase ‘ not physical any traditional sense’ because digital representation is often discussed in
terms of being a physical implementation of information. I put physical properties of computer engineering
aside for the sake of how analytic aesthetics typically refers to materiality of digital media with,
let us say, the physical properties of a painting.
4 For a greater analysis on interactivity and displays see Lopes 2001, 2010; Preston 2014; Thomson-
Jones & Moser 2019.
5 Now, Artport, their internet art repository, can currently be accessed from Whitney’s Museum website:
https://whitney.org/artport.
6 See also Binkley 1990; Tamblyn 1990.
7 Researchers Smith and Smith discovered the median time to be 17 seconds per painting and the mean
time to be 27.2 seconds per painting.
References
Bassett, Caroline. ( 2007). The Arc and the Machine: Narrative and New Media. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.
Baumgartel, Tilman, Christ, Hans D., & Dressler, Iris. ( 2008). “ Computer Games by Artists”. In New Media
and the White Cube and Beyond, Christiane Paul ( Ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
pp. 233–250.
Benjamin, Walter. ( 1936). “ The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction”. Visual Culture: Experiences
in Visual Culture, 70(1–2): 144–137.
Binkley, Timothy. ( 1990). “ The Quickening of Galatea: Virtual Creation without Tools or Media”. Art
Journal, 49(3): 233–240.
Chalmers, David. ( 2017). “ The Virtual and the Real”, Disputatio, 9(46): 309–352.
Cook, Sarah. ( 2008). “ Immateriality and Its Discontents”. In New Media and the White Cube and Beyond,
Christiane Paul ( Ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, p p. 2 6– 49.
Floridi, Luciano. ( 2010). Information: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gaiger, Jason. ( 2009). “ Dismantling the Frame: Site- S pecific Art and Aesthetic Autonomy.” British Journal
of Aesthetics, 49(1): 43–58.
Gaut, Berys. ( 2010). A Philosophy of Cinematic Art. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ippolito, Jon. ( 2008). “ Death by Wall Label”. In New Media and the White Cube and Beyond, Christiane Paul
( Ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, p p. 1 06– 132.
Kania, Andrew. ( 2018). “ Why Gamers Are Not Performers”. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 76(2):
187–199.
Krauss, Rosalind. ( 1979). “ Sculpture in the Expanded Field”. 8: 3 0– 44.
Levinson, Jerrold. ( 1989). “ Refining Art Historically.” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 47: 21–33.
———. (1993). “Extending Art Historically.” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 1: 411–423.
Lopes, Dominic McIver. ( 2001). “ The Ontology of Interactive Art”. Journal of Aesthetic Education, 35(4):
65–81.
Lopes, Dominic McIver. ( 2010). A Philosophy of Computer Art. London/ New York: Routledge.
———. (1973). Six Years: The Dematerialization of the Art Object from 1966 to 1972. New York: Praeger.
Noll, A. Michael. ( 1970). “ Art Ex Machina”. IEEE Student Journal, 8(4): 10–14.
Paul, Christiane. ( 2008a). New Media in the White Cube and Beyond: Curatorial Models for Digital Art. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
———. (2008b). Digital Art, 2nd edition. London/ New York: Thames & Hudson.
Preston, Dominic. ( 2014). “ Some Ontology of Interactive Art”. Philosophy & Technology, 27(2): 267–278.
Rush, Michael. ( 2005). New Media in Art. London: Thames & Hudson.
Smith, Jeffrey K., & Smith, Lisa F. ( 2001). “ Spending Time on Art”. Empirical Studies of the Arts, 19(2): 229–236.
Tamblyn, Christine. ( 1990). “ Computer Art as Conceptual Art”. Art Journal, 49(3): 253–256.
Tavinor, Grant. ( 2017). “ What’s My Motivation? Video Games and Interpretative Performance”. Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 75(1): 23–33.
Shelby
Moser
58
TeamLab (2018). Universe of Water Particles on a Rock Where People Gather. [website description]. Tokyo, Japan. https://borderless.teamlab.art/ew/iwa-waterparticles/.
Thomson- J ones, Katherine, & Moser, Shelby. ( 2019). “ The Philosophy of Digital Art”. The Stanford Ency-clopedia of Philosophy ( Fall Edition), Edward N. Zalta ( Ed.). https:// plato.stanford.edu/ archives/ fall2019/ entries/digital-art/.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-8 59
6PERFORMANCE ART
David Davies
“ Performance art” is a category of art of which most a rt- afficionados are aware, but it is much less clear how this category is to be delineated, and what conditions a work must meet if it is to fall into this category. While being art and being literature might seem sufficient for being literary art, being art and being a performance are clearly not sufficient for being performance art, as we shall see shortly. This suggests that, to get a clearer understanding of “ performance art,” we must first ask what kind of a category of art this is. As we shall see in Section 1, categories of art group artworks in a number of conceptually distinct ways. After looking in Section 1 at some ways in which we might understand the principle upon which things are grouped as performance art, I examine, in Section 2, the idea that works of “ performance art” are best understood in terms of the relations in which they stand to certain developments in the artworld in the 20th century: such developments saw artists seeking to overcome the perceived narrowness of what were taken to be the defining conditions for other categories of art. In Section 3, I shall explore a way of identifying and differentiating different kinds of works of performance art by reference to how they work as works. This will also allow us to examine the sometimes puzzling relationship between perfor-mance art and conceptual art.
1 What Kind of Category of Art is ‘ Performance Art’?
Like all labels for categories of art, “ performance art” groups together certain artworks in virtue of something they are taken to have in common. It is tempting to think that, as a way of group-ing artworks, the category “ performance art” functions like other groupings such as literary art, sculpture, cinematic art, and painting. In the latter cases, we assume a fairly robust intrinsic con-nection between the works grouped together under these categories. Take, for example, works of visual art such as Piero’s The Resurrection. Our appreciative interest in any work of art is at least in part an interest in what we may term the work’s artistic content. The latter is made up of those broadly representational, expressive, or formal properties rightly ascribable to the work. The pigment- covered surface is the means whereby the artistic content of The Resurrection was articu-lated through Piero’s actions. We can think of that surface as the work’s artistic vehicle. We are able to grasp the work’s artistic content by bringing to bear, upon the artistic vehicle, our understand-ing of how different kinds of artistic contents can be articulated in the physical medium of paint in the artistic tradition to which Piero belongs. This analysis can be generalized to other arts such as literature and music. An appreciative interest in an artistic artifact ( or an event) is an interest in the artistic content for which that artifact ( or event) serves as the artistic vehicle. Such an interest
David Davies
60
may be thought of as “ interrogative”: it seeks to make sense of observable features of the artifact
( or event) in terms of reasons for their being ordered in the way that they are.
This general framework gives us a way of thinking about what leads us to group works into
the kinds of categories just distinguished. Suppose we ask what makes something a work of
literary art. It cannot be merely that it incorporates language in some way, for some works of
non- literary art do t his – some collages and some conceptual pieces, for example, such as Fiona
Banner’s Break Point ( 1998). Rather, it is because a work’s artistic vehicle, in the sense just specified,
is a ( contextualized?) textual structure that we classify it as a work of literary art. Similarly,
a work of musical art has as its vehicle a ( contextualized?) acoustic structure of some kind. To
generalize, a work of art is classified as falling under a particular medium- s pecific category just in
case the work’s artistic v ehicle – t hat is, the primary means whereby the work’s artistic content is
articulated – i s a manifold or structure in that medium. As we know from Walton’s discussion of
artistic categories ( Walton 1970), m edium- specific categories cannot be restricted to the physical
medium employed: they must also incorporate shared understandings as to how doing things with
that physical medium results in particular artistic contents. We engage here with what has been
termed an “ artistic medium” in one of the senses of that term ( see Davies 2003).
There are other ways of classifying and grouping artworks, however. “ Street art,” for example,
classifies works in terms of the milieu in which they are intended for display, not in terms
of their artistic medium, although any individual work of street art will be in a medium of some
sort – s imple or c ompound – a nd will articulate its artistic content in virtue of the manner in
which that medium has been deployed in generating the work’s artistic vehicle. “ Outsider art,”
in contrast, groups artworks by reference to the social profile of their creators, and “ innuit art”
according to the cultural context in which works originated and the uses to which they were put
in that context.
Suppose we try to understand “ performance art” in the way that we just understood the categories
of “ literary art” and “ visual art.” A work of performance art, it might be suggested, is a
work that articulates its artistic contents, whatever they may be, through an artistic vehicle that is
a performance. The most obvious problem with this proposal is that even if it might be necessary,
if something is to be a work of performance art, that its artistic vehicle be a performance, this
is clearly not sufficient. For such a condition is also satisfied by works in the performing arts more
broadly construed, including standard works of theatrical and musical art. The artistic content of
a work of music, or of an individual musical performance, is articulated at least in part through
the experienceable properties of musical performances, but it would run strongly counter to our
practice to classify standard musical performances, or the works thereby performed, as works of
performance art. Furthermore, consider how we distinguish between different kinds of works
in the performing arts. Works of music, theater, and dance are grouped according to the aspects
of performances taken to be instrumental in the articulation of a work’s artistic content. It is the
sounds generated through the movements of a group of musicians, for example, rather than the
physical properties of those movements, that is the primary means whereby the artistic content of
a musical work or performance is articulated. Even if, as argued by Jerrold Levinson ( 1990), the
physical movements of the musicians sometimes contribute to the expressive content of the music,
these movements serve to expressively inflect the content articulated by the primary vehicle – the
sounds generated by those movements. Similarly, it is primarily through the actions and utterances
of a troupe of actors that the content of a theatrical work or a theatrical performance is articulated.
Consider, however, the “ noise music” of Russolo which is listed by R ose- L ee Goldberg ( 2001,
Chapter 1) as an early example of “ performance art.” In the case of Russolo, it might be said,
the artistic content of a performance of the work seems to be articulated not by the sounds produced
per se, but by the manner and medium through which such sounds are produced. Different
“ performances” by Russolo might plausibly be viewed as performances of the same work even
Performance Art
61
though the noises produced are different, as long as those noises are produced through the manipulation
of the specified instruments. To appreciate such works, what we need to grasp is the
resonance, given standard musical practice, of producing sounds by the means prescribed. This
suggests that what distinguishes those performances that we take to be examples of performance
art from performances of works in the performing arts is the aspects of the performances to which
we need to attend if we are to properly appreciate those works. In the performing arts, it might be
said, what matter are the experienceable manifolds generated by performers, but in performance
art what matters at least as much is the nature of the actions themselves whereby such perceptual
manifolds are produced, and perhaps also the very idea of doing what the performers are doing.
I’ll further explore this suggestion in Section 3.
2 Can ‘ Performance Art’ be Defined Historically?
Given the kinds of concerns just addressed, some theorists have suggested that the category of
“ performance art” is better defined not in terms of a specific kind of medium used to articulate
an artistic content, but, rather, in terms of the relation in which works stand to certain historically
situated traditions of artistic making, traditions from which such works emerge or by reference
to which they define themselves. This is the approach taken by two prominent writers on this
issue, RoseLee Goldberg ( 2001), who has authored an authoritative history of performance art,
and Noël Carroll ( 1986), who situates performance art in relation to theoretical and practical
innovations in the visual and theatrical arts in the latter half of the 20th century. Both authors
resist the invitation to define “ performance art,” on the grounds that the phenomena we seek to
capture under that label are too diverse. Goldberg stresses that much 20th- c entury performance
art originates in dissatisfaction on the part of artists, individually or collectively, with more established
artistic practices, and with working within the limitations of particular artistic media ( 2001,
9). Early performance artists often drew in a single work upon different art forms and different
media – literature, poetry, theater, music, dance, architecture, and painting, as well as video,
film, slides, and narrative – and this has continued to be a characteristic feature of performance
art. Artists deploy these various resources in ways that by their very novelty defeat any attempt at
definition. All that can be said is that performance art is “ live art by artists.” But, as we have seen,
this is at best a necessary condition for being performance art in the accepted sense. And it is by
no means necessary that a performance by a performance artist be presented live to an audience.
Acconci’s Following Piece, to be discussed in Section 3, might demonstrate this, as would other
pieces by Acconci that are available to us through film but that were performed privately. And the
works of the contemporary performance artist Matthew Barney are made available to audiences
only in highly complex cinematic presentations. A further issue, as we shall also see in Section 3,
is that some widely accepted works of performance art have never had, or even never could have,
live performances.
Goldberg traces the roots of performance art in the second half of the 20th century to such earlier
movements as Italian Futurism, Russian Constructivism, Dada, Surrealism, and Bauhaus. In
each case, she maintains, the “ object” works customarily associated with these movements come
out of an artistically revolutionary impulse whose initial, but now widely ignored, expressions
were in performance. This often involved theatrical performances that stressed provocation, interaction
with the audience, and the rejection of the traditional theatrical idea that performance is
work- p erformance. Such performances drew upon non- artistic practices such as the circus, vaudeville,
cabaret, and puppet shows, and sought to relocate art in public space rather than in galleries.
The focus was not, as in theater traditionally conceived, on the representation of action and the
rendering of a text, but on the performers themselves and the visual aspects – the s pectacle – of
the performance. The conjoining of different traditional artistic media in such performances is
David Davies
62
well illustrated in the Bauhaus conception of the “ total art work,” something echoed in the “ happenings” of the 1950s and 1960s and also in later works by artists such as Robert Wilson.
Carroll takes avant- garde theater, as represented in particular by Artaud, to be one of two sources of the interest in performance in the art of the 1970s and 1980s. He distinguishes between what he terms “ art performance” and “ performance art.” The former originated in the 1960s as a reaction to perceived problems with the ways in which visual artworks were presented in galleries. The doctrine of “ medium specificity,” promoted most forcefully by Clement Greenberg ( 1993), was seen as denying the relevance of the artist’s “ performance” in creating a work, something ex-emplified in the action painting of Jackson Pollock. “ Art performance” manifested itself initially in “ happenings” that rejected both the idea of the purity and autonomy of different artistic media, and the focusing of artistic interest on formal properties of objects divorced from the activities of artists. One of the most famous such performances took place at Black Mountain College in North Carolina in 1952, and involved collaborations, under the aegis of John Cage, between musicians, choreographers, poets, painters, and fi lm- makers. Later exponents of “ art performance” included individual artists such as Acconci, who used his body as a medium for exploring and expressing themes relating to human interaction, and Gilbert and George, who produced works of “ live sculpture.” While their artistic vehicles are actions, these works, like traditional visual artworks, are made accessible to audiences in art galleries, but only through the visual or verbal records or documentations of the performances. Carroll, like Goldberg, stresses the awareness, on the part of those involved in the development of “ art performance,” of the earlier traditions of Futurism and Dada.
“ Performance art,” in Carroll’s sense, developed out of traditional theater, as a reaction against the idea that dramatic performance should be a vehicle for a literary text. It stressed, rather, the performative aspects of group or individual activity on a stage, and the values, such as specta-cle, realizable through such activity. The orientation of traditional theater toward representation, spectatorship, and fidelity to the text was replaced by a concern with the presentational, the par-ticipatory, and the visual and gestural. In dance, this manifested itself in the interest in the body in motion explored in the work of choreographers like Yvonne Rainer – something that echoes the interests of the Futurists in the body as mechanism. Rather than the performer mediating between the audience and a character that she represents, there is a focus on performativity, the unmedi-ated interaction between the performer and her audience. Recent work in “ performance art” in Carroll’s sense has generated, and in turn been influenced by, philosophically inflected studies of performativity by those working in “ performance studies” ( see, for example, the papers collected in Parker and Sedgwick 1995, and the entries in Cull O’Maoilearca and Lagaay 2020).
Jonah Westerman ( 2016, no pagination) offers a more recent attempt to survey the field of “ performance art” by reference to themes in its historical development rather than a distinctive medium. The development of the idea of performativity in art since the m id- 2 0th century, he argues, has culminated in a tendency to think of all art as performance. The problem is that such a ubiquitous usage of “ performance” “ can obscure, by way of generality, more than it illuminates.” To address this concern, Westerman identifies four key “ dimensions” of performance along which works can be situated relative to one another in revealing ways. The dimensions span the con-ceptual spaces “ between ephemerality and the archive, between action and idea, between col-laboration and estrangement, and between reality and representation.” Each of these dimensions, Westerman claims,
Describes a tension between seemingly opposed, yet intrinsically related concerns... Pursuing how a given work negotiates each of these tensions allows us more clearly to see how a given work’s formal organization understands the nature and purpose of art, positions its audiences and articulates its social, political and spatial situation.
Performance Art
63
Westerman’s discussion of how individual works can be fruitfully related along these dimensions
resembles in some ways my attempts to map the same terrain in the following section.
3 Performance Art, the Performing Arts, Conceptual Art and
the Role of the Audience
While the detailed studies of examples in Goldberg, and to a lesser extent in Carroll, provide a
cautionary lesson for anyone drawn to the idea that performance art is a medium- based category,
we can nevertheless identify at least some distinctive features that may allow us to more clearly
map the field of performance art in ways less dependent on historical situation, and to identify
some of the central traits in performance art since the 1960s.
In looking earlier at the relationship between performance art and the performing arts, I noted
that it seems to be a defining condition of the latter that the object of our appreciative attention is
a performance, and that it is through the manifest properties of that performance that the focuses
of artistic or more narrowly aesthetic appreciation are made available to receivers. Thus, at least
on what I have termed ( Davies 2011, C hapter 2) the “ classical paradigm,” music is a performing
art in which musical works are appreciated at least in part through the experienced properties of
their performances, and in which, arguably, the performances themselves may be objects of artistic
or aesthetic appreciation. It has traditionally been assumed that this same model captures what
goes on in other performing arts such as theater and dance: there are performed works and performances
of those works, and the proper appreciation of both of these things as art is essentially tied
to the experiences elicited in receivers by performances. This provides the background to some
prominent recent philosophical debates about the performing arts: ( a) To what extent does the
“ classical paradigm” obtain outside of the tradition in classical music to which it owes its name?
Much has been written challenging the extension of the classical paradigm to Rock Music, Jazz,
Theater, and Dance. ( b) To what extent is live attendance at a performance necessary in order
to appreciate a work in the performing arts? Might it be possible to fully appreciate a work or a
performance of a work if a receiver’s access to that work or performance is epistemically mediated by
some kind of technological apparatus? Can we appreciate jazz improvisations through recordings,
for example, or appreciate works of dance through screened ( or even l ive- s creened) representations
of performances of those works ( see Davies 2019)?
But this central assumption about the performing arts does not seem to hold for many canonical
works of performance art. There seems to be no requirement, for the proper appreciation of
such works, that the appreciator have an unmediated experiential engagement with a performance
at least partly definitive of that work. As we shall see, it is in the case of such works that the border
between performance art and conceptual art seems to be most difficult to draw. This point can be
made initially by reference to different works by one of the more celebrated performance artists.
We can then see how distinctions drawn in the case of these works of a single artist map onto
significant differences between individual performance artists and their works.
The works of Vito Acconci in the late 1960s and early 1970s are often taken to be a paradigm
example of performance art. In her monograph on Acconci, Kate Linker ( 1994) identifies two
central themes in Acconci’s work of this period: ( a) the breaking down of the barriers that traditionally
separate artist from receiver, and the attempt to integrate the receiver into the work itself,
and ( b) the mediation of the cultural distinction between personal and private spheres. Two works
that explore both of these themes are Proximity Piece ( 1970) and Seedbed ( 1972). In the former, the
performance is defined as follows:
Standing near a person and intruding on his or her personal space. During the exhibition,
sometimes each day, I wander through [the Jewish museum in New York] and pick out, at
David Davies
64
random, a visitor to one of the exhibits: I’m standing beside that person I’m standing behind that person, closer than the accustomed d istance – I crowd the person until he/ she moves away ( I crowd that person until he/ she moves me out of the way).
( Acconci 2004, 206)
In the latter ( see Acconci 2004, 2 20– 2 21), Acconci lay under a raised section of the floor in the Sonnabend Gallery in New York: “ I’m crawling under the floor over which viewers are walking. I hear their footsteps on top of me...I’m building up sexual fantasies on their footsteps, I’m mastur-bating from morning to night.” In both cases, the performance engages with people attending the exhibition in which Acconci’s work is being presented. In the former case, there will usually have been no awareness of this fact by the persons engaged, and thus no appreciation of the work on the part of those persons at the time. In the latter case, viewers might have been aware of Acconci’s voiced fantasies and of the identity of the piece in the gallery. Both performances are preserved through minimal documentation in the form of a few photographs. If we think that the artistic vehicle for each work is Acconci’s live performance, few if any of the details of that performance are available to those seeking to appreciate the work after the fact, and as just noted those present at the time had very limited opportunities to take account of these details. If, on the other hand, the work’s artistic vehicle is a performance of which the receiver is to be made aware through the documentation, the performance so construed is very thin in its manifest features, in striking contrast to the way in which performances function as objects of appreciation in the performing arts. Indeed, it seems that the work’s artistic contents are articulated more by the idea of doing what Acconci did than by the manifest properties of that doing.
This analysis seems even more apposite in the case of another of Acconci’s works, Following Piece(1969):
Activity, 23 days, varying durations. New York City. Choosing a person at random, in the street, any location, each day. Following him wherever he goes, however long or far he trav-els. ( The activity ends when he enters a private p lace— his home, office, etc.).
Since the actions making up this performance occurred unpredictably and unannounced on the streets of New York, those seeking to appreciate this work could only accidentally and unknow-ingly have experienced his performances, and must rely on the documentation of the manifest features of what Acconci did. Furthermore, this documentation is both very limited and was in fact staged, after the completion of the “ performance.” Here even more clearly the actual performance- e vent seems to enter into the identity of the work only by instantiating the type of performance characterized in the performative constraints set out by Acconci. The photo-graphic record serves only to imaginatively enliven the performance for the receiver, to help her to imagine what the performance was like in virtue of satisfying those constraints. The use of photography in such a minimal documentary role should presumably be taken by the receiver to indicate that visible features of the actual performance not preserved in the documentation are not important for the appreciation of the work. Such a work therefore has an essential conceptual dimension, if we follow Sol LeWitt’s claim, in his “ Paragraphs on Conceptual Art” ( 1967), that “ in conceptual art, the idea or concept is the most important aspect of the work. When an artist uses a conceptual form of art, it means that all of the planning and decisions are made beforehand and the execution is a perfunctory affair.”
Acconci’s Following Piece has an essentially conceptual d imension – what matters is the idea of doing the type of thing that Acconci did – but it also has an essentially performative dimension – i t also matters that he actually did something of this sort. But this raises the possibility of works of “ performance art” that are in fact purely conceptual. In such works, there is no requirement that
Performance
Art
65
the artist actually executes a performance satisfying a given description. In some cases, in fact,
it seems that the described performance could not actually be executed because of physical or even
conceptual obstacles. Consider, as an example of the latter kind of impossibility, this piece by
Yoko Ono: “ Draw an imaginary map … Go walking on an actual street according to the map”
( Contribution to the exhibition Information staged at MOMA in New York, Summer 1970 ( see
Goldberg 2001, 154)). Or consider one of the pieces contained in La Monte Young’s Compositions
1960: a prescription to “ draw a straight line and follow it,” In other cases, it doesn’t seem to matter
whether a described performance has been executed or not. Given the exhibition for which
it was proposed, it is reasonable to assume that the following performance piece was not actually
executed: “ Drill a hole into the heart of a large tree and insert a microphone. Mount the amplifier
and speaker in an empty room and adjust the volume to make audible any sound that might come
from the tree” ( Bruce Naumann, “ Amplified Tree Piece” which featured in a 1970 exhibition
entitled Art in the Mind (see Lippard 1973, 162–163)).
The examples cited thus far of pieces by Acconci and others illustrate ways in which works of
performance art can be partly or wholly conceptual: in such works, it is not, as in the performing
arts, the manifest properties of an actual performance that articulate the artistic content of the
piece, but, rather, the very idea of carrying out a particular performance. But other performances
by Acconci were deliberately preserved in detail by unedited recordings made at the time, and
therefore seem closer to the model familiar from the performing arts. Consider, for example, his
Conversions I, II, and III ( 1971), described in an exhibition catalogue as follows: “ Acconci attempts
to alter his sexual boundaries and, by implication, his sexual identity by turning himself into the
image of a woman” ( I draw here on the booklet for an exhibition including this piece at the Duke
Street Gallery, London 2001). One of these attempts involves using a candle to burn the hair off
his chest, something that was recorded without sound on Super 8 film. We can observe the entire
unedited performance, and this, it might be thought, provides us with the same access to the relevant
perceptible properties of a performance as we would get from observing a filmic representation
of a performance by a dancer or a musician. Are such works by Acconci, then, properly seen
as performance works that share the central features of works in the performing arts?
That the answer to this question should be a negative one becomes clear when we realize that
the filming of Acconci’s actions did not just serve the purpose of recording the details of what he
did, but was also internal to the work itself as a work of performance art. Writing of Acconci’s use
of super- 8 and other filmic representations of his performances, Linker states that
In its capacity as a record, the photograph has the capacity to re- p resent and make public an
activity that would otherwise go unremarked: it provides a means of transforming private acts
into public information, accessible to multiple channels of distribution.
This inclusion of the photographic presence within the performance that serves as artistic vehicle
also figures in the articulation of one of the central themes in Acconci’s work of this period noted
above: the mediation between personal and private spheres. Linker writes that
In its capacity as a record, the photograph has the capacity to re- p resent and make public an
activity that would otherwise go unremarked: it provides a means of transforming private acts
into public information, accessible to multiple channels of distribution.
(1994, 18)
Thus, again, rather than being a documentation of the performance which serves as artistic vehicle
for the work, the filming of Acconci’s self- m anipulations is itself a crucial part of that artistic
vehicle.
David
Davies
66
It might be thought that to focus on an artist like Acconci, whose performances are almost never for an audience present at the time of the performance, is to suggest a more rigid distinction between performance art and the performing arts than is in fact the case. For there are other equally renowned works of performance art whose performances do take place in a public setting where those present are aware of this fact. And, indeed, in some case, the performances are clearly treated by both the artist and the public as performances of multiply performable works. Would not such performances fall under the aegis of the performing arts as normally understood, being sep-arated only by the kinds of a rt- i nstitutional considerations cited by Goldberg and Carroll? Let us take as an example the Serbian performance artist Marina Abramović. Abramović is known for live performances, beginning in the 1960s, that involve subjecting her body to various tests of both physical and psychological endurance. In one of the most notorious of these pieces, Rhythm 0 ( 1974), she remained completely passive in the performance space for six hours while members of the audience were invited, without any responsibility for their actions, to use on her various objects. The objects included a feather, a jar of honey, a whip, scissors, olive oil, a scalpel, a gun, and a single bullet. After displaying an initial reluctance to participate in the performance, au-dience members became increasingly aggressive. The performance was intended to explore the relationships between a performer and an audience in a situation where there are no ( apparent) social consequences attached to actions. Another work performed in front of a live audience that tests the endurance of the performer, Luminosity ( 1997) involves the following performance: “ the performer, naked, holds her balance for thirty minutes on a bicycle saddle, her feet dangling above the floor, while she slowly moves her arms and legs” ( Palazzo Strozzi, 2018). Interestingly, as the description of the performance suggests, this piece can be performed on multiple occasions and by individuals other than Abramović. It was so performed by hired performers as part of The Cleaner, a recent retrospective of Abramović’s work held at various European galleries, and the retrospec-tive also involved similar reperformances of three other of her works. Another piece, however, seems to require Abramović’s own participation and may not be reperformable by others. The work, The Artist Is Present, was performed at another retrospective of her work held at MOMA in New York in 2010. On the MOMA website, the piece is described as follows:
The work was inspired by her belief that stretching the length of a performance beyond ex-pectations serves to alter our perception of time and foster a deeper engagement in the expe-rience. Seated silently at a wooden table across from an empty chair, she waited as people took turns sitting in the chair and locking eyes with her. Over the course of nearly three months, for eight hours a day, she met the gaze of 1,000 strangers, many of whom were moved to tears.
[https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/marina-abramovic-marina-abramovic-the-artist-is-present-2010/ [accessed 05/05/21] Recordings of this parts of this performance were screened in those galleries where The Cleaner was presented in 2018– 2019.]
But, as should already be apparent, neither the public nature of these performances nor their potential multiple performability brings them into agreement with the understanding of per-formances in the performing arts sketched above. For, just as the presence of the camera was internal to the artistic vehicle of Acconci’s Conversions as discussed above, so the presence of the “ audience” and its engagement with the performer is internal to the artistic vehicle of Abramović’s performance works. Just as a proper appreciation of Acconci’s Conversions requires that we take as our artistic vehicle his actions as captured by the camera, so a proper appreciation of Abramović’s pieces requires that we take the artistic vehicles to be interactions with members of an audience: the experiences and responses of the audiences are elements in the work rather than elements in the appreciative understanding of the work. Thus, I think, while the attempt to define performance art in a medium- specific way, as a kind of performing art distinguished by those aspects of a
Performance
Art
67
performance that are constitutive of the artistic vehicle, is misguided, we can still identify certain
distinguishing features of those performances generally viewed as works of performance art other
than their location in a rt- historical and art- institutional space.
The renegotiation of the relationship between the artist and those attending a performance
event exemplified in Abramović’s pieces is central to Erika F ischer- Lichte’s claims, in her rich
and detailed study ( 2008) of what she terms the “ performative turn” in the arts, about the
“ transformative” nature of performance art. Using as an example Abramović’s Lips of Thomas,
an event which was terminated by the intervention of members of the audience to “ rescue” the
performer from further physical suffering, F ischer- Lichte talks first about the way in which such
events transform the “ spectator” into an actor whose actions are integral to the staged “ event”
More generally, she argues that the key aspect of the performative turn in Western art since the
1960s has been the replacement of the “ work of art,” which mediates between the creativity of the
artist and the receptivity of the audience, by “ an event set in motion and terminated by the actions
of all the subjects i nvolved – artists and spectators” ( 2008, 22). This serves to undermine, or at
least redefine, two core ideas of traditional aesthetics: the distinction, mediated by the work of art,
between the artist and the receivers of the work, and the distinction between the materiality of the
work and its semioticity, the former being of interest only so far as it realizes the latter. Speaking of
the first of these ideas, she claims that “ instead of a work of art that existed independently of [the
artist] and of the recipients, [Abramović] created an event that involved everyone present.” While
Fischer- Lichte’s very rich study brings out the artistic diversity and originality of performance art
in its many forms, I have preferred to preserve, in my discussions of the same body of works, a
broader notion of “ work of art” that I think can accommodate both traditional works in F ischer-
Lichte’s s ense – t hings created by the artist and presented for appreciation to r eceivers – and what
she terms “ events” – t hings that incorporate interactions between an artist and an audience within
their artistic vehicles and articulate an artistic content through vehicles so conceived. I take the
analogy drawn above between Acconci’s integration into the work of the process of filmic documentation
and Abramović’s integration into the work of her interactions with the audience, as a
suggestion as to how it might be helpful to preserve the model of the work of art developed earlier
while also recognizing the striking “ transformations” that are at the center of Fischer- Lichte’s
analysis.
References
Acconci, Vito ( 2004). Vito Hannibal Acconci Studio. Barcelona: Museu d’Arte Contemporani de Barcelona.
Carroll, Noel ( 1986). ‘ Performance’, Formations 3, 63–79.
Cull O’Maoilearca, Laura, and Alice Lagaay, eds. ( 2020). Routledge Companion to Performance Philosophy.
London: Routledge.
Davies, David ( 2003). ‘M edium’, in Jerrold Levinson, ed., Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2003, pp. 181–191.
Davies, David ( 2011). Philosophy of the Performing Arts. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Davies, David ( 2019). ‘ Dance Seen and Dance- screened’, Midwest Studies in Philosophy 43, 117–132.
Fischer-Lichte, Erika (2008). The Transformative Power of Performance: A New Aesthetics. London: Routledge.
Goldberg, RoseLee ( 2001). Performance Art: From Futurism to the Present, Revised and Expanded Edition.
London: Thames and Hudson.
Greenberg, Clement ( 1993). ‘M odernist Painting’, Reprinted in John O’Brian ( ed), Clement Greenberg: The
Collected Essays and Criticism, Volume 4. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, p p. 85– 9 3. Originally
published in 1960.
Levinson, Jerrold ( 1990). ‘ Authentic Performance and Performance Means’, in Music, Art, and Metaphysics.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell, pp. 393–408.
LeWitt, Sol ( 1967). ‘ Paragraphs on Conceptual Art’, Artforum 5(10), 79–81
Linker, Kate ( 1994). Vito Acconci. New York: Rizzoli.
Lippard,
Lucy (1973).
Six Years: The Dematerialization of the Art Object. New York: Praeger.
David Davies
68
Palazzo Strozzi ( 2018). Exhibition Guide to the Exhibition Marina Abramović: The Cleaner, held at the Palozzi Strozzi, Florence, 21st September 2 018– 20th January 2019.
Parker, A., and Sedgwick, E. ( 1995). Performativity and Performance. London: Routledge.
Walton, Kendall ( 1970). ‘ Categories of Art,’ Philosophical Review79, 334–367.
Westerman, Jonah ( 2016). ‘ The Dimensions of Performance’, Performance at Tate: Into the Space of Art, Tate ResearchPublication,2016,https://www.tate.org.uk/research/publications/performance-at-tate/ dimensions-of-performance, accessed 3 July 2021.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-9 69
7YOU HAD TO BE THERE
Installation as Art Form and Argument
Karen Gover
Installation art is paradoxical. It can be seen as a rejection of modernist values, such as aesthetic autonomy, self-sufficiency, formalism, and the primacy of medium. At the same time, however, it fits within the modernist project to make art that self-reflexively refers back to itself as an artwork that draws attention to its own animating conditions and assumptions, and asks the audience to do the same. Another way to look at the paradox of installation art is to consider the ways in which it is both radically innovative and at the same time a throwback to a much older mode of artistic ac-tivity, a “return to the cave,” as one practitioner provocatively puts it (Kabakov, 1999; 58). While it has many historical antecedents, “installation art” as we use the term today refers specifically to the form as it developed from the radical anti-establishment sensibility of the 1960s and 1970s. There is no single clear-cut definition of installation art (a point to which we will return later), but the term is often applied in two kinds of cases: either the artwork’s installation at a particular site or in a particular way is part of the work’s meaning, or the artwork is a built environment that the visitor must enter and temporarily inhabit in order to apprehend it. For this reason, in-stallation art is sometimes seen as an extension of sculpture, since the installations usually involve three-dimensional constructions or arrangements of found objects that the viewer must inhabit and circumnavigate. Nevertheless, installation art, along with Minimalism, Conceptualism, Pop Art, and other important art movements of the 1960s, was often made with the intention of con-founding certain expectations about sculptural works of art and about the importance of artistic medium in general (Krauss, 2010; xii).
As curator Hans Ulrich Obrist has observed, a common feature of theories of installation art is that it rejects the ideal of an artwork as an autonomous, self-sufficient object (Obrist, 2001; 24). The locus of aesthetic appreciation is pointedly not a single object, paradigmatically a painting or sculpture, viewed as indifferent to and independent of its location in time and space. Brancusi’s sculptures are emblematic of the modernist ideal of self-sufficiency and autonomy insofar as he had custom-built pedestals for the works and presented the objects as something special and set apart from their surroundings. Even in the case of works without specially designed pedestals or frames, we often assume that artworks, insofar as they are embodied in discrete objects, have meanings that are indifferent to the circumstances of their location in time and space. Installation art stands as a challenge to that assumption, and the art form that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s often attempted to undo the expectations and assumptions set by the modernist paradigm.
Hence, when viewed in relation to the historical moment in which it emerged as an important mode of artistic activity, installation art as a kind of staged, sited, often impermanent art experi-ence offers not just a different kind of artwork for viewers to consume, but can be seen as a rebuke
Karen Gover
70
to certain cultural ideals and norms. The installation art that developed in the middle of the last
century was a self-conscious assault on several features of the art establishment of the time: first, it
pushed against the notion that a work of visual art properly consisted in a singular, self- contained
object; second, by making environments or temporary sites rather than unique and durable objects,
installation art also resisted commodification and exchange on the art market; third, it also
offered an alternative model of aesthetic appreciation to the disinterested contemplation that was
articulated by Kant and enshrined in practice with the norm of the “white cube” gallery. Of
course, as with all things that were once avant-garde, his once-radical rebellion against modernist
ideals and the institutions that promulgated them has become a fixed feature of the art establishment.
Major contemporary art institutions, such as Tate Modern or the Guggenheim, often
commission artists to create installations for their dramatic, soaring atria. This has led some critics
to complain that the contemporary art installation is just another form of “spectacle,” designed to
please crowds but ultimately superficial (Bishop, 2005; 63). Artists in recent decades have taken
some of the innovations of installation art and pushed them further with artworks that demand
active audience participation, which we find in works grouped under the term “relational art,”
coined by curator Nicholas Bourriaud, and which more recently has been put under the rubric
“social practice art” (Voorhies, 2017; 8). In this regard, installation art as a form has lost some of
its radicality and iconoclasm, but is an important precursor to the critical art movements of the
21st century.
1 What Does “Installation Art” Mean?
Any theoretical discussion of installation art must begin with a reflection on the term itself, since
its meaning is more complex than it may at first seem. As many scholars have pointed out, the term
“installation” when applied to art is vague. All art is in at least a trivial sense installed somewhere,
somehow.1 Some artworks are placed with great intention and care for the way in which their arrangement
will enhance or affect the reception of the work, but this would still not be considered
“installation art,” strictly speaking. To take an extreme example, consider the Barnes Foundation
Collection, in which Impressionist and Post-Impressionist masterpieces hang alongside ordinary
household objects and non-Western artifacts in what Albert Barnes referred to as “ensembles.”
While many of the objects that make up his collection are themselves masterpieces, Barnes’ storied
assemblages of artworks and artifacts are celebrated as an accomplishment in their own right.
However, the installation of art, no matter how thoughtful or innovative, is not the same as “installation
art” in its contemporary sense, which treats it as a distinctive mode of art-making.2 Even
within this narrower scope of the term’s meaning, however, there is some slippage between the
notion of installation as an exhibition practice and as an art form in its own right.
Indeed, it is perhaps entirely appropriate that installation art, as an art form that rejects the paradigm
of the work as a self-sufficient, clearly bounded object, has a correspondingly open-ended
range of applications. The label “installation art” has been applied to such a wide range of cases
that it is probably impossible to provide a definition that would cover all necessary and sufficient
conditions. While the term often brings to mind large-scale, immersive sites, it can be applied in
widely varying kinds of cases. Sometimes, for example, the term “installation art” is applied to
an artwork that consists of an object positioned in a specific place, so that the circumstances surrounding
the location of the object are essential components of the work. One notable example is
Banksy’s installation of a blow-up doll representing a Guantánamo detainee next to Disneyland’s
Rocky Mountain Railroad Ride in 2006 (Nath, 2013; 185–192). The artwork consists not just
of the blow-up doll, but its illegal placement at Disneyland, in the Frontierland section. Does
that make Banksy’s guerilla installation a work of “installation art”? In a sense, yes, even though
Banksy did not construct for us an immersive environment in the way that artists such as Ilya
You Had to Be There: Installation as Art Form and Argument
71
Kabokov or Nick Cave have done. Insofar as the artwork consists not simply of an object, but of
that object’s location, as well as the circumstances of its placement, one could argue that it counts
as a work of installation art. On the other hand, one might call it a site-specific artwork, rather
than an art installation per se.
Or consider Martha Rosler’s The bowery in two inadequate descriptive systems, 1974–1975, which
on the surface seems to be a mere grouping of photos on a wall—an installation of art, but not “installation
art.” Rosler herself acknowledges this, but in her reflection on the work three decades
after its creation, she says that she considers the work to be essentially an installation. She intended
it for a specific kind of space, she explains, and intended it as a whole to transcend “the idea of a
mere series of prints” (Rosler, 2001; 59). From Rosler’s perspective, then, the work is not just the
collection of photos, but their location in a particular environment. It is difficult, in such cases, to
maintain the sense of installation art as an immersive site that must be physically navigated, while
at the same time we can respect the fact that the work involves installation as a key element of its
meaning. Hence, the term “installation art” is, in practice, so open-ended that it can be applied to
a wide range of works, some of which may not seem on the surface to embody its key components.
In its paradigmatic sense, however, “installation art” installations are site-specific, temporary,
and require that the audience encounter the artwork as unfolding through space and time. Because
of their immersive character, the viewer physically moves through and around the installation
in order to have an adequate experience of it, and the installations often appeal to multiple
senses rather than just the visual. This feature is intentional, and stands as an alternative, if not a
pointed rebuke to the distanced contemplation that the modernist work of visual art implicitly
requires of its viewer. As Claire Bishop puts it, installation art
addresses the viewer directly as a literal presence in the space. Rather than imagining the
viewer as a pair of disembodied eyes that survey the work from a distance, installation art
presupposes an embodied viewer whose senses of touch, smell and sound are as heightened as
their sense of vision. This insistence on the literal presence of the viewer is arguably the key
characteristic of installation art.
(Bishop, 2005, 6)
While this may seem like a straightforward distinction—the disembodied ideal viewer of modernist
painting and sculpture versus the fully embodied audience member that installation art calls
forth—we find in Bishop’s characterization what seems to be another puzzle about installation
art’s supposed difference from other modes of visual art: just as all artworks are installed, it would
seem to be an analytic truth that all works of art, insofar as they are made by someone with the
intention that they be experienced with one or more of one’s bodily senses, assume the presence
of an embodied viewer, even though Bishop identifies this as a key point of distinction. It is not
clear why works of visual art involve a “disembodied gaze” as opposed to an embodied one. (Even
high-modernist works of painting or sculpture often relate in their scale to the body of the viewer,
which is one reason why it is taken as given in art circles that seeing reproductions of artworks in
books or on the internet is not the same as seeing them in person.)
In a way, however, this is precisely the point: installation art targets certain fundamental elements
of artwork appreciation in the Western tradition that have been presupposed or taken for
granted, such as placement, or the embodied subjectivity of the viewer, and makes them central
to the experience of the work. Theorist Juliane Rebentish explains this by pointing out that “inclusion
of the beholder,” which is
often cited as an innovation of Minimal art and installation art... is a characteristic of all experiences
of art. The true innovation in Minimal and installation art would be the fact that
Karen Gover
72
the self-reflective and performative structure of the aesthetic object relation seems to emerge with particular clarity in the various spatial mise-en-scènes of the object.
(Rebentisch, 2012, 56)
In other words, what was new or radical about installation art in the 1960s and 1970s is not simply that it consisted of artworks made to be viewed by an embodied subject. Rather, the innovation consisted in the foregrounding of these elements in a way that calls attention to them as such—this is the “self-reflective and “performative structure” that Rebentisch refers to in the quote above. By making apparent an aspect of our engagement with artworks that is suppressed or ignored in so-called autonomous works of art such as easel paintings and sculptures on pedestals, installation art appears to break with the modernist tradition that preceded it.
2 Nick Cave’s Until (2016)
A salient, recent example of a contemporary work of installation art that exemplifies the potential of the medium is Nick Cave’s Until (2016), which was on display in the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art from October 2016 to September 2017. Until ranged over the museum’s football-field–sized Gallery 5, and was Cave’s largest and most ambitious installation at the time. The very fact that the work took up so much space, and had multiple components, meant that it could not be taken in with one single view, but had to be explored from within in order to expe-rience it. A visitor to Until typically approached the installation from the southern door of Gallery 5, and encountered an expanse densely hung with metallic whirligig lawn ornaments, which then opened on to the center of a space in which sat a raised platform densely encrusted with chandelier crystals. Visitors could ascend one of four staircases to view what lay hidden in the canopy, which consisted of an elaborate assemblage of found objects, including black-face lawn jockeys, pigs, birds, flowers, tennis rackets, and gewgaws of all kinds. Other areas of the installation included a wall of foil strips that spelled the word “FLOW,” and a space for live performances by musicians, dancers, poets, and others who were invited to participate in the work.
Cave’s installation, in both its materiality and its political meaning, engaged and implicated the visitor on many levels. It called upon multiple physical senses; it required the physical participation of the audience members as they moved through the space, brushing up against some elements, climb-ing a ladder-like staircase to see others, and it is assumed that these multi-sensory, multi- media, and even multi-authored aspects of the installation are not simply incidental to its meaning, but that they are constitutive elements of it. As one article on the piece noted, “viewers are meant to be included—and implicated—in the work, as they will be able to see one another in peekaboo vistas across the installation” (Loos, 2016; 12). Of course, visitors can see one another looking at artworks of any kind when they are sharing gallery space. But the default presumption, at least until relatively recently, is that those glances that viewers exchange when looking at an artwork are ancillary to the work itself. Another presumption would be that their race and social position would be irrelevant to the meaning of the work. Cave’s installation draws our attention to those relations. He includes racist pop-culture artifacts, such as lawn-jockeys, and embeds them in a glittering, bead-encrusted, alluring composition that both attracts and disturbs the viewer. For these reasons, we might consider Until to be an exemplary work of installation art, making use of the medium’s potential to make meaning with features that are not generally available to more traditional art forms.
3 Does Installation Art Predate Modernism?
While paradigmatic works of contemporary installation art like Until can indeed make different demands of their audience than a painting or a sculpture, it is important to take a longer historical
You Had to Be There: Installation as Art Form and Argument
73
view when assessing its significance as an art form. When considering its “radical” origins in the
1960s and 1970s, for example, one is tempted to point out that the practice of site-specific, immersive
environments designed for aesthetic appreciation, and not concentrated on a single object,
have been around for a long, long time. In fact, seen in a certain light, something resembling
installation art is much older and more fundamental to the way in which artworks have been arranged
and offered for aesthetic experience than it may seem if we take modernism to be the paradigm
for all art appreciation. Ancient Greek temples and their sculptures, palaces and churches
with their frescoes, sculptures installed as part of the architecture of a renaissance plaza, all predate
the archetypal self-contained, autonomous art object. Indeed, we could say that the easel painting
and the sculpture in the gallery or museum are in fact relative newcomers in terms of modes of
artistic expression, and that the postmodern art installation draws on a much more established and
ancient artistic practice than the modernist paradigm against which it positions itself.
Pre-modern artistic practices aside, there is another reason not to overestimate the radicality
of the installation art that developed in the 1960s and 1970s: the important art installations
made during peak modernism that served as precursors and inspiration. Kurt Schwitters’ Merzbau
(1923–1937), which ranged over eight rooms in his studio and home, and was destroyed by
a British air raid in 1943, is an iconic example of a built sculptural environment that included
found objects. For the 1938 International Surrealist Exhibition, Marcel Duchamp hung 1,200 coal
bags stuffed with newspaper in the main hall over a stove, lit by a single light bulb. Visitors were
handed a flashlight and asked to navigate a space filled with found objects contributed by other
artists, including Man Ray and Salvador Dalí. Among the objects were a coffee-roasting machine,
a pond, and a Louis-XV–style bed. Four years later, in 1942, André Breton organized the first
major exhibition of surrealist art in the United States, called First Papers of Surrealism. Duchamp
festooned the exhibition space with his so-called mile of string, which enmeshed the paintings
and sculptures in an elaborate web of twine. These were influential forerunners to the practice
that would come to be considered “installation art” proper a few decades later.
While these examples share many of the key features that make later instances of installation
art distinctive, scholars generally agree that the term properly applies only to those works made
beginning in the 1960s and 1970s in the spirit of an anti-establishment break from modernism.
Alex Potts acknowledges that installation art must be understood within a longer historical view
than some theorists who emphasize its rejection of modernism have wanted to take. Nevertheless,
he says, “the move to installation needs to be understood in part in localized historical terms as
a reaction against the increasingly formulaic and restrictive privileging of the autonomous object
in mainstream post-war, high modernist conceptions of sculpture” (Potts, 2001; 15). Hence, installation
art is part of a larger dialectical movement within the Western art tradition, and at the
same time, its emergence in the post-war era makes those more recent iterations distinctive and
definitive of the form as we currently engage with it.
4 What Is Wrong with the Self-Sufficient Art Object, Anyway?
Not all artists and critics regard the rebellion against the ideology of modernism that installation
art and other “postmodern” art movements of the 1960s embodied as a good thing. Art critic
Michael Fried famously decried this kind of art, which he called “literalist” art, as “incurably
theatrical.” One might suppose that theatricality is conceptually opposed to the literal, insofar as
“theatricality” connotes the realm of illusion and make-believe. But what Fried meant by these
terms is that makers of “literalist” art claim simply to be offering an experience to the viewer,
stripped of convention or illusion. Insofar as this kind of art is explicitly addressed to an audience,
and in fact requires an audience to complete the work, it is theatrical. Unlike the self-sufficient
modernist work, which ignores the presence of a viewer, literalist work overtly requires one.
Karen Gover
74
Theatricality, Fried says, “is a function not just of the obtrusiveness and, often, even aggressive-ness of literalist work, but of the special complicity that that work extorts from the beholder.” He contrasts this with the “presentness and instantaneousness of modernist painting and sculpture,” by virtue of which they “defeat theater” (Fried, 1998; 155). Fried’s analysis was first presented in Artforum in 1967, and has remained a touchstone of contemporary art history and criticism when discussing post-modern art movements. What is striking about his argument is that he basically agrees with the fundamental premise that modernist painting and sculpture are committed to the ideal of the self-sufficient, autonomous work of art—it is just that he views the modernist sensibil-ity as a good thing, and sees art that attempts to undo or deny this, such as installation art, as not simply bad art, but as non-art.
Modernist critic Rosalind Krauss focuses on installation art’s altered relationship to artistic medium as the locus of her criticism of the form. She follows Clement Greenberg in understand-ing artistic medium to be the mechanism by which artists generate meaning. Under modernism, painters make paintings that address the essential conditions of painting itself, such as “flatness.” Similarly, in the case of sculpture, modern artists make works that not only embody but are in some way about the essence of sculpture: three-dimensionality. The problem with installation art, for Krauss, is that it does not have a medium of its own which the artist can then leverage to generate meaning. As she puts it, “installation is relentless in its refusal of specificity, filling gal-leries with mixtures of video images and taped narratives,” and she refers to her “conviction as a critic that the abandonment of the specific medium spells the death of serious art” (Krauss, 2010; xiii). Hence, Krauss and Fried agree that installation art falls outside of the modernist paradigm for what counts as important or serious art, insofar as it pointedly rejects certain ideals, such as the primacy of medium and the apparent indifference of the work to its audience.
What Fried and Krauss may not have anticipated in the late 1960s as they took their respective critical stands is the extent to which these initially radical gestures of rebellion would be com-fortably subsumed over the ensuing decades into the very art system that they struck out against. For example, while some installation artists may have sought to make artworks that could not be commodified because they did not consist in a single, portable, easily transferrable object, artists and galleries have found ways to sell works of installation art, and collectors have proven willing to acquire them. Museums, curators, and critics have devoted considerable attention to the unique problems that surround preserving and displaying works of installation art (Van Saaze, 2013). While certain norms and practices must be adjusted to accommodate installation art, the basic val-ues of provenance, authenticity, and felicity to artistic intention are still operative. Hence, when viewed from a distance of several decades, installation art does not represent as radical a break from the art that preceded it as it may have seemed in the years immediately following World War II. The fundamental paradox that underlies installation art is the following: its rejection of certain modernist ideals also constitutes its continuity with other aspects of the modernist project.
When we look at the claims made in favor of installation art as a rejection of the autonomous, self-sufficient work, we can discern at least two lines of argument: an ontological argument and a political one. Each purports to be making overt or explicit a key aspect of the artwork that is hid-den by the modernist ideal of the self-sufficient work. The ontological argument made by installa-tion art is that the so-called self-sufficiency of the artwork is merely a posture, an illusion: even if a work of art, a painting or a sculpture, say, seem indifferent to our presence or to its placement in a specific location, and even if it seems to be immediately and fully present to us in a single glance, in fact it is not. Underlying this idea seems to be a normative claim that artworks should not en-gage in this kind of pretense. By making artworks that do not coalesce in a single object, installa-tion art, in theory, makes explicit the fact that any art object derives its meaning from its relation to other objects, situated in both space and time. No art object, just as no human subject, is an island unto itself. Because installation art draws the viewer into the frame and requires her to step
You Had to Be There: Installation as Art Form and Argument
75
inside and inhabit the artwork rather than to gaze at it from a distance, it forces a self- awareness of
the mutual relation not just between artwork and audience but also their embeddedness in a web
of relations across space and time.
The political dimension of this “drawing in” of the viewer and the dispersal of the artwork
over a site rather than concentrated in a single object is that the audience cannot remain a passive
consumer of the work but must actively and physically engage with it. This activation of the
viewer as an embodied subject is presumed, then, to have implications not just for the viewing of
art but for the viewer more generally. As Bishop points out, installation art’s requirement that the
viewer be physically engaged with the work in order to perceive it fully is
Regarded [by many artists and critics] as emancipatory, since it is analogous to the viewer’s
engagement in the world. A transitive relationship therefore comes to be implied between
‘activated spectatorship’ and active engagement in the social-political arena.
(Bishop, 2005; 11)
There seem to be two different ideas embedded in this idea of “activated spectatorship” that installation
art suggests: the first is that such artworks require an engagement by the viewer that more closely
approximates the movements of daily life, and hence, they are truer to our experience, as opposed to
an artificial stance of disinterested contemplation. The second thought here stands in some tension
to the former, as it involves the utopian wish that such an activation on the part of the spectator will
carry over into political activism. But why and how, we might ask, would one’s engagement with
a work of art have any effect on our behavior as citizens, especially if such activated spectatorship is
simply mirroring what we already do in the rest of our lives as we engage with the networks of people
and things in our world? Such an idea can only gain traction if we assume that our engagements
with artworks are somehow special or exemplary. And in that sense as well, installation art does not
represent a break from modernist sensibilities but simply extends and reinforces them.
Notes
1 As Alex Potts notes, “The idea of a non-installation would be something of an oxymoron,” Potts, A.
2001. Installation and Sculpture. Oxford Art Journal, 24, 7–23.
2 Bishop, C. 2005. Installation Art: A Critical History, New York, Routledge. I am greatly indebted to Bishop’s
book for informing this essay.
Works Cited
Bishop, C. 2005. Installation Art: A Critical History, New York, Routledge.
Fried, M. 1998. Art and Objecthood, Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.
Kabakov, I., Tupitsyn, M. & Tupitsyn, V. 1999. About Installation. Art Journal, 58, 62–73.
Krauss, R. 2010. Introduction. Perpetual Inventory. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Loos, T. 2016. The Artist Nick Cave Gets Personal About Race and Gun Violence. The New York Times,
August 12.
Nath, A. 2013. Seeing Guantánamo, Blown Up: Banksy’s Installation in Disneyland. American Quarterly, 65,
185–192.
Obrist, H. U. 2001. Installations Are the Answer, What Is the Question? Oxford Art Journal, 24, 95–101.
O’doherty, B. 2004. Inside the White Cube: The Ideology of the Gallery Space, University of California Press.
Potts, A. 2001. Installation and Sculpture. Oxford Art Journal, 24, 7–23.
Rebentisch, J. 2012. Aesthetics of Installation Art, London, Sternberg Press.
Rosler, M. 2001. Installed in the Place of the Public. Oxford Art Journal, 24, 59–73.
Van Saaze, V. 2013. Installation Art and the Museum: Preservation and Conservation of Changing Artworks,
Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press.
Voorhies, J. 2017. Beyond Objecthood: The Exhibition as Critical Form Since 1968, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

PART IIHistory

DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-11 79
8ANTIQUITY
Nickolas Pappas
Though not in anything like today’s profusion, the Greeks and Romans did live among visual imagery. They saw paintings, mosaics, pottery drawings, and statues around them, and they found such images worth remarking on.
Moreover visual imagery seems to have been treated as central to aesthetic experience. Ploti-nus, writing in Greek during the Roman Empire, reminded his reader that sounds and melodies too could be b eautiful – t o say nothing of virtues and kinds of k nowledge – as if in acknowledg-ment that most people associated what is kalos “ beautiful” exclusively with sights.1
The culture’s fascination with visual art comes through in anecdotes, like one about a contest between the painters Zeuxis and Parrhasius, contemporaries of Socrates.2 Zeuxis displayed his painting of a child carrying grapes, the grapes so lifelike that birds flew down from the sky to peck at them. But when Zeuxis demanded that Parrhasius draw back the curtain on his own painting to see whose was better, Parrhasius revealed that his “ curtain” was a painting. He had deceived not ignorant birds but a savvy fellow painter.3
The story comes from that unreliable Roman encyclopedist Pliny the Elder; it is harder to arrive at a systematic description of how the visual arts of antiquity were understood and valued in their time, especially during the classical period. To some degree our difficulty results from in-complete evidence about the art itself. Artists in the ancient Mediterranean made everything from engraved temples of marble and granite to the drawings on clay bowls and vases, and much of this has disappeared in the last few thousand years. Anything painted especially has faded, therefore any proof of what Zeuxis and Parrhasius could do. Ruins and potsherds, mosaics and the occa-sional intact sculpture or pottery drawing, suggest what the visual environment once looked like. But even this evidence can’t easily show what the ancients thought about their own art.
And so when philosophers in the ancient world theorize about the art of their time, and even when we have both their arguments to consider and the visual arts they’re talking about to look at, we have to make an additional effort to give their theories the context they need, above all the beliefs and practices of n on- p hilosophers. Not only what someone like Plato says about sculpture concerns us, but also how what he says fit with the uses and functions of sculpture and the other arts around him.
1 Clement of Alexandria
Clement was a Christian bishop living during the first centuries of the Roman Empire. He be-longed to a religion that had reached the point of organizing itself as an institution, though not
Nickolas Pappas
80
the point of achieving legal toleration, and that now accelerated its work of persuading polytheists
away from their old religions. As Paul the apostle had done traveling through Greece a century
earlier, Clement both assimilated aspects of Greek culture together into one great mistaken old
ideology, and counted on the Greeks’ good sense in recognizing the errors of their erstwhile ways.
Some fragments from the earliest philosophers, like Heraclitus and Xenophanes, survive to the
present because Clement quotes them approvingly in his polemical writings – which doesn’t mean
that he quotes them appositely, but does show how he thought a dialogue might develop between
Christianity and pre-Christian philosophy.4
Clement’s Protrepticus pros Hellênas “ protreptic address to the Greeks,” or exhortation to turn
them out of the old paths, begins with samples from music, sculpture, and drama. People’s moral
compass has ceased functioning to such a degree that terrors bring them joy. Look at the plots of
Greek plays. “ Even I, for whom this is only a myth, am distressed by the misfortunes that have
been worked up into tragedies. But at your hands those ills become drama”; and as drama they
bring pleasure.5 Clement solves what we call the tragic paradox, the problem that we seem to take
pleasure watching distress and suffering, by simply denying that anyone of balanced mind would
enjoy a tragedy. No pleasure ( for the sane), no paradox.
Plato and philosophers before him had already argued against Greek arts and religious practices,
and Clement quotes them to support his position. And given Clement’s willingness to enlist
Greek philosophers as allies, it can feel natural to identify his arguments with theirs and in particular
with the arguments in Plato, whom Clement treats with special respect.6
Clement develops at least three lines of attack on the visual arts, all of which lead to his dismissing
them as “ playthings.”7 He focuses on sculpture rather than on painting, because of its uses in
ritual.8 ( 1) A representational statue, somewhat like a dramatic performance, deceives its audience;
so we can call its maker a deceiver. The statue creates the appearance of a young man alive and
running when what there actually is before them is an insensate stationary rock. ( 2) Such forms
and figures bewitch their viewers; thus, we may also speak of wizardry at work. Clement puts the
deceivers together with sorcerers, and associates the successful deception in visual art with goêteia
“ sorcery.” As if in a spirit of concession he finds skill residing in drawing. It is homoia “ similar to”
its original. But taking image for original, let alone valuing the i mage- m aking act, again bespeaks
a mind overthrown. The thoughtless people he is speaking to are like those who have drunk mandragoran
“ mandrake,” in other words are bewitched.9
( 3) On top of the charges of deception and sorcery, we find the accusation that images participate
in the polytheistic rites that Clement is trying to wean his readers from. What the Greeks
have done with their votive objects amounts to superstition. Before Clement, Paul had told the
Athenians that he saw them as deisidaimonesterous “ very superstitious” in the ignorant respect they
paid to a god they didn’t know of. Their altar to an “ unknown god” at least chanced to refer to
someone existent, Paul tells them; but that god does not dwell in cheiropoiêtois “ handmade” dwellings
or resemble a graven image.10 For Clement the lesser misstep that comes when one admires a
graphic likeness in drawing and sculpture ( 3) leads many p eople – l ed the G reeks – t o the greater
and depraved error of imagining those works to depict gods and spirits ( 1), and imagining that by
depicting those gods and spirits those works could connect us with them.
Clement’s argument takes an obscure turn when it combines two attacks, even given some
truth to the criticisms considered individually. His diagnosis that the enchantment by art began
with admiring likenesses mystifies the very descent into polytheistic pathology that he is trying to
expose. Had the experiential pleasure of appreciating images suggested the idea of powers beyond
sensory experience? Then images would have had to arouse interest in themselves and simultaneously
deflect that interest toward absent objects. No clear causal mechanism makes that possible.
What’s more, and fatally for his argument, Clement identifies the earliest objects of worship
in Greece: blocks of wood, stones, planks.11 Such aniconic items, often called xoana, could not
Antiquity
81
have instigated pagan ritual with the power of their verisimilitude, however much they swayed
the Greeks’ minds. Clement sees visual depiction, sorcery, and superstition all at work at once in
Greek religion, but his desire to bring a new worldview to the Greeks seems to have made him
find a single worldview there ( and one aesthetic view) to be supplanted, when there may have
been several.
2 Early Talk of Art’s Images
What the Greeks did do originally with their visual arts is still subject to debate. Some scholars
argue for a pointedly aesthetic response to the arts in Greek culture before Plato, of a sort that
modern readers have failed to appreciate. James Porter describes a materialist reception of artworks
that includes the first appearance of a general idea “ art,” and an aesthetic sensualism that has
been blocked from sight by the influential formalist art- philosophy in Plato and Aristotle.12 Porter
should be kept in mind as a rebuttal to my take on the subject. Nevertheless his interpretation of
early antiquity, compelling though it is, downplays the dominant tradition in those first years that
responded to and addressed itself to artistic images.
Homer composed his epics almost a millennium before Clement, at the beginning of the Mediterranean’s
literary tradition; and already in Homer one element of visual art that Clement will
attack comes in for special attention. That element may be seen in the most celebrated artifact of
the Iliad, which is the shield that Hephaestus makes for Achilles. Achilles’ mother Thetis visits
Hephaestus and requisitions armor for her son, and out of affection for her the god makes this
elaborate shield. He emblazons its face with a double scene: city in peacetime, city at war. Homer
dwells on the scenes in an extended first example of ekphrasis.13
Several features of this passage qualify it as containing an early articulation of how to understand
visual art. The passage’s attention to the human world reinforces the sense of visual depiction as a
referential relation between objects of experience and the images of them. The cities on the shield
matter because human life matters, and because they bring r eal- l ife cities before the viewer’s eyes.
The scene also points to the parallel or kinship between visual art and poetry. What Hephaestus
depicts on the shield, Homer depicts in his epics.14 Homer describes the i mage- m aking as an
art comparable to his own, thus hinting at the analogy between visual imagery and verbal depiction
that Plato will exploit in the Republic. The ekphrastic attention claims for epic the same praise
of awe that we imagine Achilles’ shield arousing on the Trojan battlefield.15
After Homer, the poet Simonides would compare the art forms explicitly. “ Painting is silent
poetry, and poetry is painting that speaks.”16 Ostensibly setting the two arts side by side as equals,
this epigram gives the advantage to poetry, the one that possesses words. Simonides does not finish
by saying that “ poetry is invisible painting,” which would have left poetry and painting each
missing something.17 Not yet a theoretical taxonomy of art into verbal and visual forms, still the
comparison establishes the defining feature of visual art to be the work through which it resembles
poetry, namely its denotativeness.
A crucial phrase in Homer’s ekphrasis humanizes the image- making art in another way, this
time with reference to the work it does. Hephaestus inserted a “ dance” or “ dance floor” on the
shield, “ like the one that Daedalus produced in sprawling Knossus for beautiful- h aired Ariadne.”18
This is the lone appearance of the name “ Daedalus” in Homer, and the comparison contains a
whiff of impiety: Hephaestus underground at the foundry does what Daedalus had done on Crete,
as if the god were inspired by the human. Significantly, Hephaestus and Daedalus were both credited
with having made statues imbued with life, moving and speaking as people do.19 Even if the
simile in Homer innocently illustrates the great skill of Hephaestus, this comparison between his
work and Daedalus’ signifies that the shield belongs among human artifacts, speaking to mortals
about mortal society and important to its audience for that reason.20
Nickolas Pappas
82
A fragment from one of Aeschylus’ satyr plays should be mentioned here, for its use of the ter-minology that figures so prominently in Plato and Aristotle: mimêsis “ imitation, representation, emulation” naming the process of copying, the mimêma the copy or likeness. In a scene from this lost play, perhaps Theoroi, someone has given a group of satyrs some masks that resemble them. ( Of course the satyrs are played by humans wearing satyr- m asks.) One speaker marvels at the Daidalou mimêma “ Daedalic likeness,” and might be saying that the similarity to his face would delight his mother. Another s atyr- play joke: satyrs have faces that only their mothers can love. Still the speaker’s evident pleasure, and perhaps his mother’s, evoke an experience of enjoyment at the sight of well-made visual arts.21
3 Mimêsis in Plato and Aristotle
When philosophers come to speak of the visual arts, they too understand examples in terms of likeness or similarity of representation. Sometimes they do so without using a word for specifi-cally artistic representation – the pre- Socratic philosopher Xenophanes, for instance, complaining about anthropomorphic artworks of the gods. “ If oxen or lions had hands and drew with their hands and produced works as men do, horses would draw the forms [ideas] of the gods that are like [homoias] horses and oxen [forms that are like] oxen.”22 You may think that these images pay tribute to the unseen gods, but in fact ( Xenophanes is saying) human beings have been making them, their eyes on other humans, representing visible faces and bodies. The drawings do no more than reflect the bodily features of the beings that make them.
Plato’s dialogues do not invariably analyze art as likeness and representation. Many passages speak in approving terms of painting and sculpture or at least call one’s skill at making them a technê “ profession, craft.”23 But these passages tend to be about something else, with visual art illustrating some point by analogy. When Plato actually wants to explain how a visual likeness works, he appeals to intentional resemblance.24
Indeed Xenophon and Plato both report Socrates talking about mimêsis as that applies to the visual arts, and beginning with those Socratic conversations the word becomes something of a technical term.25 Mimêsis names a relationship between a visible original and its visible likeness. Philosophical treatments of mimêsis will range from abusive to celebratory, but either way the representing act takes place among visible objects.26
For Plato the problematic art form is always “ poetry,” that word in his time comprising epic, song, and tragic and comic drama. So when the Republic develops an idea of mimêsis meant to apply to poetry and painting together, it is only to be expected that the concept puts painting in the worst light possible. Likewise, when Plato’s Sophist analyzes mimêsis with an eye to explaining sophistry, it will leave representation in the visual arts looking, as Plato wants sophists to look, simultaneously insubstantial and mendacious.
Of the four passages in Platonic dialogues that treat mimêsis, two speak exclusively about poetry (Republic Book 3, Laws Book 4), and equate the mimetic act in poetry with the dramatic or im-personatory effect: writing and performing a character’s words.27 Nothing follows by an obvious route from dramatic representation to the visible likeness that Homer describes on the shield of Achilles. It will take someone with Plato’s animus to broaden character- impersonation to contain visual depiction, by making both artistic acts species of the image- m aking that presents appear-ance. He makes that connection in Book 10 of the Republic, speaking of poetry, and then along different lines in his Sophist.
In Republic Book 10, painting becomes the argument’s s talking- h orse. The shortcomings of painting are to show what goes wrong in poetry. Plato might be speaking of drawing and painting as such, or could have a particular style of painting in mind. Alongside generic talk of painting the argument refers to skiagraphia, arguably not ( despite its name) painting that uses shadows – in
Antiquity
83
contour drawing or with cross- hatches – but perhaps a pointillistic application of paint that enhanced
bright contrasts and vivid coloration.28 Whichever method is at stake, the image that results
is compared to a mirror that reflects all visible things – “ making all things,” Socrates says, to
which Glaucon replies, “ Yes, their appearance.”29 For regardless of whether skiagraphia is the only
species of painting that Plato means to attack, any painting that tries to capture the look of things
faces the same criticism.
Whereas a carpenter thinks about the Form of the table or couch in order to fabricate a
wooden table or c ouch – t hereby producing something of lesser worth yet still informed by
understanding – the painter presents a table after doing no more than look at, looking at without
thinking about, one particular table ( as opposed to the Form), and worse yet, after looking at it
from a single angle: looking at its appearance. The one who uses a flute or bridle has to know
the most about it. A painter possesses neither knowledge nor correct opinion but merely keeps an
eye open for what the flute and bridle look like, or rather for what they seem to look like. Given
that the reasoning part of one’s soul seeks to know what is real about its object, for example by
measuring; and given that the part of the soul charmed by appearances shows no interest in measuring
or knowing reality; it must follow that something other than the soul’s best part enjoys
visual mimêsis.30 Built on the spongy ground of ignorance, visual representation welcomes those
content to live in unreality.
A competent spectator of painting will want to object. “ When you look at the painting of a
couch you know it’s not going to teach you what a couch is. You don’t look on the other side of a
painting expecting to see the other side of the couch.” For Plato this educated viewership sounds
like the self- deluding apology of the perverted mind, offering as self- defense what ought to be understood
as the damning admission. The problem is exactly that visual art makes appearance more
satisfying than reality and so stimulates a desire for ignorance. The admiring spectator would
rather see the representation than the thing represented, hence chooses lie over truth. Visual art,
although in one respect possessing no worse than the lowly ontological status of shadows and
reflections in still water, poses a threat to reason that those barely- b eings do not, by encouraging
the preference for appearance over reality. What one learns to do, when becoming sophisticated
about painting, is to enjoy an appearance that makes no promise of reality.
The enjoyment is very much to the point. Xenophon already depicted Socrates identifying
accurate representation in sculpture as a source of the terpsis “ pleasure” it provides.31 For Plato the
art makes ignorance enticing because of the pleasure it brings. Clement is taking himself to follow
Plato when he declares pleasure at adept representation to be the cause of all subsequent idolatry.
Republic Book 9, just before Book 10’s analysis of mimêsis, has followed the decline of a soul to
its lowest possible condition, when it is the soul of a tyrant. This worst of all souls, standing as it
does at the opposite extreme to the r eality- loving philosophical soul, feeds itself on appearances.32
Love of visual and dramatic representation follows from the debased state a soul is in and also
worsens that debasement, by encouraging the preference for incomplete, empty, erroneous image
over knowledge and reality.
In the Sophist, Plato’s other analysis of visual mimêsis, the dialogue’s main speaker the Eleatic
Stranger accuses sophists of making images. He grants that some images are blameless, like trees
reflected in water, registering as they do real properties of the thing being represented. The pernicious
variety is the image that the Stranger calls phantastikê “ fantastical, phantasmagorical.” The
makers of such likenesses are trying to stimulate the eye illusionistically, and they will falsify the
properties of the represented thing to do so. The head and upper parts of a large statue would look
disproportionately small from below if the statue were cut to human proportions. To look right
to its viewer, it has to be cut wrong, head and upper parts outsized, because the sculptor seeks to
mimic the visual experience a viewer would have looking at a person.33 The statue becomes false
to its referent to become truer to the spectator’s experience of that referent.
Nickolas Pappas
84
When the Sophist refrains from calling all mimêsis bad, it qualifies what Book 10 of the Republic says about visual art.34 The Sophist refines the Republic’s accusation, discovering which subtype within the category of mimêsis most interferes with rational thinking. Having found that culpable subspecies, the Sophist passage reinforces the Republic’s more basic claim that the visual art that captures a likeness loses touch with the depicted thing’s reality. Just as the f urniture- artist gives the look of a couch or table as seen from one side, the sculptor gives the look of the human form as seen from below. How the thing is being seen is part of the art of representing it. What the object looks like remains distinguished from what it is.
Again mimêsis sets up a transition from what a thing looks like to what looking at it is like, in other words from the representation’s resemblance to the depicted object to its resemblance t o – its simulation o f – o ne’s perception of that object. We are in the realm of visibility as such, moving away from visibility as link to reality. Thus, mimêsis understood as one visible object’s reference to another, which after all could be a truthful reference, turns into illusion, something inclined to deceive.
The illusion also suggests sorcery. That type known as the sophist who is the object of this dialogue’s investigation practices mimêsis and also appears as a magician- fi gure. Why shouldn’t his conjuring have rubbed off on the sculptor?
The Republic itself qualifies Book 10’s attack on painting. First we have to consider that paint-ing often carries a positive potential in the Republic. Socrates says that describing an ideal polity resembles what a painter does in depicting a fi ne- l ooking man. He compares the establishment of a new constitution to drawing a portrait with constant looks back to its subject.35 The comparisons to painting swing one way and then another enough that attempts to make its attitude coherent sound ad hoc.
Similes aside, the education proposed for guardians offers the Republic an opportunity to iden-tify what is good in painting. After cataloguing the faulty moral lessons modeled in poetry and the dangers that lurk in poetic mimêsis, Socrates proceeds to educational experiences that can shape and strengthen virtue in the city’s rulers. Comely paintings that depict acts of courage and mod-eration join the pleasure that comes of looking at beauty with the sight of virtuous actions, thus contributing to a psychological condition in which one finds virtue attractive. This training for the guardians is not an alternative to visual mimêsis but a use that the good city makes of mimêsis. The visual representation refers to visible events just as in the deleterious cases, but this time to the manifestations of serious, brave, insightful, and pious character traits.36
Aristotle speaks of similar edification through visual arts, even if sculptures can give only sêmeia “ signs” of character. An ethical sculptor like Polygnotus, he says, is the kind for young people to learn from.37 But such edification amounts to a secondary, perhaps occasional effect of visual imagery, whose broader benefits are built into the nature of mimêsis and the nature of visual experience. For in general Aristotle understands the look of an object as an approximation to its reality. What is visible communicates an object’s perceptible or sensible form, from which one may infer its intelligible form.38 Thus, mimêsis becomes an engine for human learning. The Poetics finds occasions for learning and the transmission of knowledge at numerous points, culminating in a tragedy’s presentation of a causal regularity. The learning begins with mimêsis as such, the broad genus that poetry shares with music and visual art.
Visual art grounds Aristotle’s account of mimêsis. Human beings learn from a visual likeness, and they enjoy drawings inasmuch as drawings teach, and tragedy and poetry at large likewise teach and please.
In two unsurpassably vague words houtos ekeinos “ This that,” i.e. “ This here is that man,” Aris-totle encapsulates what one learns looking into a drawing.39 The artwork facilitates recognition of the depicted object’s essential characteristics. That is an ox: spreading horns, thick neck. And Aristotle distinguishes this cognitive content from any of the other properties that one might
Antiquity
85
believe to account for a visual rendering’s pleasures. A w hite- l ine figure drawing brings more
pleasure than a disarray of attractive colors does, so it must not be the color that pleases in visual
art.40 Nor can you attribute the aesthetic value of a drawing or painting to the attractiveness of
its object, for one dislikes the sight of a corpse or an ugly animal, yet likes seeing such things depicted.
41 So referential accuracy explains pleasure. Where the enjoyment had been for Plato a side
effect that made spectators prefer ignorance, Aristotle treats it as almost a guarantor of mimetic
knowledge.
The mention of animals considered repulsive reminds Aristotle’s reader of his extensive zoological
research, and his drive to arrive at knowledge disregarding what people commonly want to
look at. Aristotle’s compendious Parts of Animals opens by admonishing students not to turn away
from animals thought to be beneath a gentleman’s consideration. These beasts are beautiful too
if you learn how they work.42 By the same reasoning a drawing is beautiful too, assuming that it
teaches something about the animal’s nature.
4 Plotinus
Plato’s metaphysics does permit progress from perceived objects toward objects of knowledge.
Properly guided, Diotima says, the pursuit of beauty ends up transcending the beautiful bodies a
lover seeks and reaches Beauty itself.43 So there is logical space in Platonic philosophy for a vindication
of mimêsis. What if a drawing transmitted to the eye not the mere appearance of a thing
but its higher reality, so that an enterprising thinker could begin amid artistic imagery and end
up with knowledge? Suppose a painting or sculpture imitated not one particular human being but
the general term “ human being”?44
Plotinus writing in the 3rd century of our era ( a little after Clement) takes up the possibility in
one comment. As a rule Plotinus treats P lato – sometimes a Plato amplified by A ristotle – as the
arbiter and terminus of philosophical theorizing. He is slow to deny a tenet of Platonism. But he
does propose one emendation where mimêsis is concerned. “ If someone disrespects the arts on the
grounds that they work by imitating nature, one must first answer that natural things themselves
imitate something else.”45 Imitation describes the Forms’ relationship to the Good, and natural
objects’ relationship to the Forms that are present in them. For imitation to be at work in a painting
or sculpture does not suffice to condemn visual art.
That qualification to Platonic arguments takes some of the sting out of what Republic Book 10
said, even naturalizing art by showing it to engage in the same relation found in the visible world
at large; but it still retains the essential Platonic approach to mimêsis. And despite this passage’s conciliatory
tone, Plotinus also makes derogatory remarks about visual art. The mimetic arts “ take
hold of sensory paradigms,” he says, sounding as stern as Socrates did in the Republic; and evidently
following the Eleatic Stranger from Plato’s Statesman, he calls mimetic art a paignion “plaything.”46
When Plotinus amplifies the way in which art and nature both imitate, however, he takes his
description into fresh territory. A sculptor may work from an intelligible pattern. The legendary
Pheidias did not make his statue of Zeus “ on the basis of a sensory object” but represented how
Zeus would become if he wanted to appear to human eyes.47 Pheidias begins with a philosophical
conception of a god, much as the Republic says that a carpenter looks to the Form of Table and
represents it in the table he constructs.48 The sculpture represents not a mere visibility from the
material realm but something higher and invisible.
Plotinus is putting a Platonic spin on another famous anecdote about the ancient artist Zeuxis,
that Zeuxis used five different human models to create his painting of Helen, selecting the best
part of each one’s body so that he could compose the perfectly beautiful woman.49 Plotinus imagines
this act of composition as akin to the philosopher’s movement toward intelligible form. The
artwork that results from an artist’s higher knowledge, far from distracting the soul downward
Nickolas
Pappas
86
into unformed matter and the chaos of the world, will contain and can impart insights that the senses customarily miss.
Visual art recovers some of its dignity now; it can join in philosophical enlightenment. Plotinus has had to transform mimêsis to get that effect. More accurately we can say that somewhere be-tween classical Greece and R oman- era neo- Platonism, the word for how visual art functions took on a crucial ambiguity. In this sense Clement has company, despite the g round- l evel difference between his castigation of all Greek art and Plotinus’ sometime indulgence. For whereas both Plato and Aristotle treated the mimetic image as the visible denotation of something else visible, Plotinus reconceives visual art so that it stands in a referential relationship to invisible reality. What appears to depict the visible in fact connects to the intelligible, as Clement feared when consider-ing the statues of divinities.
Plotinus can even be thought of as reversing the simplification implicit in Xenophanes. Xeno-phanes complained that statues purportedly depicting gods belonged among merely mimetic works, reflecting and referring to humanity. Plotinus sees the contrary possibility, that even what would seem to speak of matter has a way of referring to nous “ mind.” To the degree that Plotinus does shift away from Plato’s writings, he may be returning to and expanding the supernatural function of visual art.
5 The N on- Mimetic Tradition of Ancient Visual Art
In amplifying the possibility that visual art relates itself to an unseen reality, Plotinus harks back to something that Plato and Aristotle seem to acknowledge: that visual mimêsis fails to tell the complete story about art for the reason that such art, sculpture especially, is treated as commu-nicating with divine realms. Such communication, and the consequent supernatural effect that statuary possesses, has little to do with resemblance. Plotinus’ innovation then consists in his at-tempt to cover both phenomena with the single term mimêsis, despite that term’s having originally described the relation between visual signifier and a signified visible thing.
Homer may foretell the mimetic analysis that philosophy will emphasize with his imagined shield engraving that reflects the epic poetry’s universe. But he also speaks of other objects, whether portable like the shield or fixed in the ground, that belong to a tradition independent of representation and likeness.
Agamemnon the high king carries a staff or scepter that Hephaestus had once made for Zeus, that Hermes had then passed to the human king Pelops, from whom it finally reached Agam-emnon.50 The scepter represents Agamemnon’s command by reason of its divine origin. Later in antiquity the Roman travel writer Pausanias reported that the people of Chaeroneia treat it as an object of ritual attention, offering sacrifices to the scepter every day.51 It is an object we could classify as sculptural today, but without iconic or visible resemblance.
The tombs of heroes count as sculptures in a looser way. They are artifacts set upon the ground to pay tribute to a hero and mark the presence of his bones. Consisting of a mound and a stêlê“gravemarker stone,” a tomb becomes a sign for people of the future to see, its value independent of any mi-metic effect in either mound or stone. ( The Greek sêma “ sign” is often used in the specialized sense to mean “ tomb.”) The place comes to be charged with significance, attracting worshipful attention that keeps the hero’s name in human circulation and even seeks to reach beyond the human world. Thus, remarkably the Iliad’s narrator ( who knows more than other humans do) refers to one elevation outside Troy that human beings call T horn- h ill, “ but the immortals the tomb [sêma] of Myrina.” People today may think it’s part of nature. The gods continue to treat it as additionally meaningful.52
To the extent that modern scholars can know how the ancient world regarded its sculpture, these Homeric examples may be said to reflect a long tradition independent of assumptions about image and likeness. Tellingly, and as Clement was already seen to imply, the sculptures most
Antiquity
87
associated with supernatural communications, possession, and divine action were those that least
revealed human workmanship. ( Once Christianity began developing its own art, it too defined
a special category, the acheiropoiêta “ not made by hand,” icons that come into existence miraculously:
Shroud of Turin, Mandylion, Veil of Veronica.53)
Commonly, and in the most recognizably worshipful practices, a xoanon or other elemental
sculpture served as the god’s presence. A plank that washed ashore or a stone of human proportions
could link you to the greatest of the gods and channel their power, as a piece of wood
( signifying Hera) did on Samos, or the omphalos stone at Delphi, navel of the world but also, as they
said, the stone that Rhea had wrapped in swaddling clothes and given to Cronus in place of Zeus.54
Such objects referred to unseen powers and permitted contact with those powers. “ Prayer was
addressed to cult statues... because direct communication with divinity could take place through
them.”55 Those who mistreated a dedicated statue, or looked when they shouldn’t, courted blindness
or other disabilities.56
In another form of reference to the invisible, stone and wooden figures for human beings could
be treated as those very humans, as when the body of someone presumed dead was irrecoverable
and mourners buried an effigy in its place.57 Similarly, a grave marker would be anointed with oil
on the festival of the dead or symbolically clothed in strips of wool.58
The headstones of those killed before their time received special attention, because of the belief
that the spirits of those dead remained close to the grave markers, then traveled to the underworld.
59 When people inscribed wishes or curses on strips of lead, they would bring their desires
to the attention of chthonic powers by burying the r olled- up lead near one of those markers.60
This practice persisted for a thousand years of Greek and Roman antiquity, giving grave- statuary
a role in an u nderworld- wide web.
Where the sculptures stand in for human beings, some mourning is at work, as in the story told
in the lost play of Euripides the Protesilaus. A warrior’s widow comforts herself with a wax likeness
of him, which ( in some versions of the story) comes to life and recreates their marriage, until a
misunderstanding leads to the destruction of the statue and then the widow’s suicide.61
Euripides’ Alcestis, which survives whole, both dramatizes mourning and associates one occasion
of mourning with a sculpted double. The play dwells on acts and signs of mourning62; and in
Admetus’ g ood- bye promises to Alcestis about how extravagantly he will lament her passing, he
promises to have craftsmen make a demas “ figurine” of her and lay it on their marital bed. He will
clasp it and call it Alcestis. And who knows? She might come visiting to comfort him in dreams,
as if in magical communication between living and dead.63
Later Heracles fights Death and seizes Alcestis and leads her back to her husband, who says the
veiled arrival comes close to having the demas “ form” of Alcestis ( the word he had used for the replacement
sculpture his craftsmen were going to make).64 Heracles reveals that it is Alcestis. The
statue has come back to life. And these and other examples, e.g., from Aeschylus’ Agamemnon, suggest
that to the degree that a conception of statuary appears in Greek tragedy, it is a n on- m imetic
conception.
6 Signification of the Invisible
In all the magical thinking that surrounds cultic uses of statuary, one common theme contrasts
such uses with what both Aristotle and Plato say about mimêsis. For better or worse the mimetic
visual object refers to another visible object. The replacement figure in stories of mourning, the
magical votive object, and the headstone as dread mailbox, are understood to communicate from
the visible realm to an invisible world of ghosts and gods.
The difference shows why deceptiveness does not elide into superstition where ancient visual
art is concerned. We worry about deception when one object purports to simulate the look of
Nickolas Pappas
another, hence makes a statement about how the other visible thing looks that may be true or false; and that in any case can be checked, for instance by putting object and representation next to each other. Discrepancies make resemblance fail. But resemblance is beside the point when an object purports to connect to invisible forces. The contact might turn on a more oblique association, as when a stone rooted in earth conjures up the spirit that roams everywhere, or when the eyeless-ness of a surrogate corresponds to the invisibility of its object. As Deborah Steiner has said, those associations are often metonymic.65
Where the visible refers to the invisible, Plato’s worries lose their bite. The imitative arts may well tempt the mind away from intelligible realities to visible appearances with their significations between one visual experience and another. Their mode of signification makes the viewer’s sen-sory organs the mode of engagement, and that fact is troublesome. But arts that aim at communi-cation with unseen powers and potentates surely avoid that failing.
Aristotle’s anti-Platonic defense of mimêsis similarly fails to apply in such cases. Aristotle praised representational art for its role in learning; this justification with reference to the signified object becomes fantastical when the signified thing can’t be seen or known by ordinary means. One can’t be said to learn from a plank that this is a god, or what a god or departed soul looks like.
The philosophers acknowledge n on- mimetic uses of statuary. The Athenian in Plato’s Laws, amid pieties about the care due to parents, contrasts the aged mother and father at home with stat-ues on which people lavish their attention. For the gods we do not see, “ we set up statues [agalmata] that are images [eikones], that we pay tribute to believing that although they are lifeless [without souls, apsuchous], those living gods feel great gratitude and benevolence toward us.” But if you have an old parent in your home, the Athenian says, you must accept that no statue will outrank this figure, if you care for it correctly.66 The worth of the statue had been thought to inhere in its power to lead to an unseen realm, as does the worth of the treasure that is an old parent.
The Athenian’s need to remind people of the relative values of parent and statue, as if they had neglected their parents while venerating the votive figures, recalls some dyspeptic hyperbole in Heraclitus: “ They pray to statues [agalmasi] as if someone were to gossip with houses, not recog-nizing what gods and heroes are.”67 Had Heraclitus known people who talked to houses? It is the image of a rustic’s ruckus at his friend’s window, raving about some personal concern even though no one’s home to hear. But for Heraclitus this is what people’s use of statuary is like.
The Laws’ Athenian seems to be making the same point in another aside. He mentions the anx-iety that some people feel “ seeing wax likenesses on doorways, at a crossroad, or on some ances-tors’ tombstones,” 68 this last example suggesting a magic practice resembling that of curse tablets.
Aristotle’s student Theophrastus sketches deisidaimonia “ superstition” directly, as it is embodied in the man who fears every bad sign and propitiates every imaginable daimonion “ spirit.” Theophrastus’ character sketch emphasizes ritual uses of sculptural artifacts. When the superstitious man sees a smooth stone set up at crossroads, he anoints it with oil and kneels to worship it; he takes pains not to step on a tomb; puts crowns on the “ hermaphrodites,” presumably anthropomorphic figures ( given that they have heads to hold a wreath of branches); runs to consult a priest if he chances to see “ a Hecate with garlic garland,” again evidently a statue, this time one on which garlic has been laid.69
Chronologically between these two disapprobations of superstition is Aristotle, sounding more entertained than anything else, when he reports an anecdote about the statue of a murdered man, Mitys, that topples over to kill Mitys’ murderer. There is a pleasure in hearing this legend because it doesn’t sound like an accident. The enjoyment that Aristotle finds in such a story doesn’t lend itself to explication in terms of the pleasure of learning that mimêsis facilitates, which is the treat-ment of pleasure early in the Poetics.70 A placard with a murder victim’s name written on it could have fallen on the murderer and produced the same idea that the event has meaning, without ref-erence to any resemblance between two visible things, rather because you wonder whether some invisible power under the sign of the murder victim has exacted this revenge.
88
Antiquity
89
Plato’s dialogues sometimes join in the act of seeing statuary refer to the invisible. In the Symposium,
Alcibiades compares Socrates to a little clay Silenus, a votive figure of a misshapen satyr
that opens to reveal beauties within. The l arge- s cale homely satyr face of Socrates opens itself
and shows beautiful sights within, which is to say beauty unavailable to the eyes. Alcibiades is
contrasting the statuesque version of Socrates with a referent not to be seen. It is not too much to
call this the magical effect that Socrates has, an effect that Alcibiades also compares to snakebite.71
And the Symposium presents this i n- s eeing insight by Alcibiades as redounding to his credit. For a
moment ( before reverting to his vanities and his love of the crowd) Alcibiades looks at a sculpted
form the right way.
The Charmides inverts the Symposium’s problem about Socrates as sculpture, again without
qualms about mimêsis. The young man Charmides is said to be looked at as if he were an agalma
“ statue.” Socrates introduces the question whether Charmides’ glamorous exterior corresponds
properly to sôphrosunê “ moderation, temperance” within.72 What if he resembled Pandora, who
had a face like a goddess but a “ thievish” character?73 A mismatch between the body and soul of
Charmides is not a matter of mimêsis, given that the relationship between outside and inside could
not be a mimetic relation to begin with. Sôphrosunê may or may not fit with and complement some
property of the body, but whatever that property is it will not be the body’s sôphrosunê, for we
are talking about virtues of the soul. Thus, C harmides- as- statue invites an inquiry into a statue’s
non-mimetic referentiality.
7 The Senses of Sculpture
According to one source, Aeschylus had already contrasted old and new statues of the gods, the
old ones simple but theia nomizesthai “ considered divine,” the new statues fussily worked and
therefore marveled at, yet creating less of a sense of the gods.74 Following Aeschylus we may speak,
cautiously, of the “ aesthetic” and “ religious” uses of visual art, depending on whether an artifact
is being placed among appearances, mimicking or otherwise representing them; or on the other
hand is taken to communicate with unseen worlds and creatures.
One cause for caution about this terminology is the overlap between the two uses. Where poetry
is concerned, Plato’s dialogues sometimes distinguish between the deleterious mimetic type
and the type that has proper purposes in worship.75 The dialogues do not distinguish similarly
between types of painting or sculpture. There will be visual artworks that both exhibit verisimilitude
and play a role in ritual practices. Clement may have supposed that one’s enchantment with
deft lifelike art led to a sense of the demonic pantheon’s enchanting our world, but even without
that mimetic sorcery there could have been statues ( like the huge Zeus at Olympia that Plotinus
speaks of ) that possessed both kinds of power. Even though divine images and r eplacementfigures
could be bare and featureless they did not have to be. Communication with the other
world sometimes took place even where an image was a likeness. Gravestone carvings could be
clothed and washed and venerated even when they looked like the deceased.
That said, the understanding and treatment of statuary did change over time, religious uses
coming first and mimêsis later, which helps to explain why Plato expends such energy on mimêsis.
He finds the new development more worrisome and in greater need of correction. Even if the
pious attention to surrogates for gods and lost humans inclines toward superstition, it does not
subvert a subject’s attempt to pass from lesser to greater knowledge.
Whether as new development or a perennial aid to learning, the ancients treated consciously
produced ersatz visual experience as the one to be explained; while to us it is what the Greeks
thought they were doing with god- p lanks and dummy corpses that calls for theoretical analysis,
their “ realistic” visual art valuable in a straightforward way. And in this respect, and despite Clement’s
exhausting himself to bring pagan antiquity to an end, he remains closer to the ancients than to
Nickolas
Pappas
90
moderns. Clement can erroneously run together artistic representation and practices of pagan wor-ship as he does only because he continues to see something compelling, intriguing, even charmed, about visual representation. When you take looking at pictures for granted as we do you will never imagine the practice to inspire religion. Clement may have misused the theories of mimêsis he took from philosophy, but he took those theories to explain what now hardly calls for explanation.
Notes
1 Plotinus Enneads 1.6.1.
2 In Plato’s Gorgias Socrates refers to Zeuxis as a painter, and in Xenophon’s Memorabilia, he argues with Parrhasius about visual art and representation: Plato Gorgias 453c–d;XenophonMemorabilia 3.10.1.
3 Pliny Natural History 35.36.10.
4 For Heraclitus ( for instance), see Clement Protrepticus 2.19, 2.30.
5 Clement Protrepticus 1.2.
6 Clement Protrepticus 6.59: “ Well done, Plato!” Clement attributes Plato’s insight to his having learned about God from the Hebrews; he names Antisthenes, Xenophon, Cleanthes, and Pythagoras as Greek philosophers with true insights about God, Protrepticus 6. 61– 62. Elsewhere he praises Euhemerus, Nica-nor of Cyprus, Diagoras, Hippo of Melos, and Theodorus the Cyrenian for disputing Greek religion despite their lacking knowledge of the truth: 2.20. In the same spirit, he quotes Empedocles: 2.23.
7 Clement Protrepticus: artworks athurmata “ playthings,” 4.51; see his reference to putting away childish things, 10.85, an apparent allusion to ta tou nêpiou “ the childish things” in 1 Corinthians 13.11.
8 Paintings do not seem to have played such a role. Indeed the main surviving examples of two- dimensional mythic depictions, painted vases, “ were mainly used in a purely secular and domestic context.” H. A. Shapiro, Myth into Art: Poet and Painter in Classical Greece ( London and New York: Routledge, 1994), p. 7.
9 Clement Protrepticus: sculptor deceives, 1.4; sorcerers, 1.4; goêteia, homoia, 4.51; mandragoran, 10.81.
10 Acts of the Apostles 17: respect for unknown god, 2 2– 23; handmade dwellings, 24; graven images, 29. Paul’s deisidaimonesterous can be taken in either the pejorative sense (“v ery superstitious”) or neutrally (“ very religious,” “ observant”). English translations split on this word, with the New International Ver-sion, Good News Translation, and others rendering it “ very religious,” while “ too superstitious” appears in the King James, Jubilee Bible 2000, and Douay- R heims Bible; the variation “ somewhat superstitious” is in the English Revised Version. But even if Paul intends to leave the word ambiguous, Clement is unwilling to ascribe legitimate piety to the polytheistic Greeks.
11 Clement Protrepticus 4.40.
12 James I. Porter, The Origins of Aesthetic Thought in Ancient Greece: Matter, Sensation, and Experience ( Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010). For fuller discussion of Porter see my review, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 70 (2012): 323–326.
13 Homer Iliad Book 18: Thetis visits smithy of Hephaestus, 369– 3 90; requisitions armor for Achilles, 429–461; the shield, 479–609.
14 The point has been made frequently. See James A. Francis, “M etal Maidens, Achilles’ Shield, and Pan-dora: The Beginnings of ‘ Ekphrasis,’” American Journal of Philology 130.1(2009): 1–23. at 12: “the scenes on the shield are emblematic of the story of the Iliad itself, so that the shield is a multilayered image of the poem, created by and embedded within the poem.” On earlier discussions of this relationship, see Francis 12n.3. And see Francis 12– 15 on a parallel in Hesiod with something like ekphrasis of Pandora (Theogony 570–615,Works and Days 60– 109) and the audiences’ responses to Hesiodic poetry.
15 “[E]kphrasis celebrates the wonder, the miracle, the shock of art ... The prophetic word of the ekphrastic mounts a kind of sermon on the power of art as thaumaturgy.” Valentine Cunningham, “ Why Ekphra-sis?” Classical Philology 102.1(2007):57–71,at65.
16 Quoted in Plutarch The Glory of the Athenians 3.1, 3 46f– 347a. See the similar comparison between zôgraphia and writing at Plato Phaedrus 275d. Writing before Plutarch but well after Simonides Horace Latinized and abbreviated the sentiment into ut pictura poesis.
17 With a similarly asymmetrical comparison, Simonides’ contemporary Pindar proclaims himself “ not a sculptor.” A statue stands in one place; his poem can travel everywhere to proclaim Pytheas’ victory, Nemean 5.1–5.
18 Homer Iliad 18.590–592.
19 For Hephaestus, see the golden girls, Homer Iliad 18. 418– 4 20; but the famous example is Pandora, Hes-iod Theogony 581, 584. For Daedalus see Euripides Hecuba 836–838,PlatoMeno 97d. Antonio Corso,
Antiquity
91
“ Ancient Greek Sculptors as Magicians,” in J. C. B. Petropoulos ( ed.) Greek Magic: Ancient, Medieval, and
Modern ( London and New York: Routledge, 2008), p p. 2 1– 27.
20 See Sarah P. Morris, Daidalos and the Origins of Greek Art ( Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992):
words related to the name “ Daedalus” in epic poetry, p p. 3– 35; the name Daedalus itself in Homer,
pp. 13–14.
21 Oxyrhynchus papyrus frag. 7 8a1– 22, in Stephan Radt, Tragicorum Graecorum, vol. 3 ( Vandenhoeck:
Göttingen & Ruprecht, 1985): Daidalou mimêma, 78a7. This passage is taken to reflect 5th- century Athenians’
interest in “ realistic” art: Mary Stieber, “ Aeschylus’ Theoroi and Realism in Greek Art,” Transactions
of the American Philological Association 124( 1994): 8 5– 119. I base my reference to a mother’s delight on
my speculation that when the text says “ my mother ... would turn,” this phrase trepoit’an ( 78a15) “would
turn” that puzzles translators could be a transposition error for terpoit’an “ would delight.” For a satyr to
say that his mother would turn at the sight of his mask has no apparent point; that she would delight has
immediate punch.
22 Xenophanes Fragment B15 ( Diels), quoted in Clement Stromata 5.110. My translation.
23 Painting is a technê at Plato Ion 532e–533a; Gorgias 430c ( and see 448b, 453c– d, 503e); Protagoras 318b–
c. In different forms this point is made by both Nancy Demand, “ Plato and the Painters,” Phoenix
29.1(1975): 1–20; and Stephen Halliwell, The Aesthetics of Mimesis: Ancient Texts and Modern Problems
( Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2002), p p. 3 7– 43.
24 To the extent that we can be sure of the chronology of Plato’s dialogues, the first appearance of an analysis
of mimêsis in his works seems to be the Cratylus. See 424d–425a, 430e.
25 Earlier uses of the root include Aristophanes Frogs 109 and Thesmophoriazusae 156, and the fragment
from Aeschylus Theoroi cited above. I argue for a link between Thesmophoriazusae and Republic Book 3:
“Mimêsis in Aristophanes and Plato,” Philosophical Inquiry 21(1999): 61–78.
26 On mimêsis see Göran Sörbom, Mimesis and Art ( Bonniers: Scandinavian University Books, 1966); Alexander
Nehamas, “ Plato on Imitation and Poetry in Republic 10,” in Julius Moravcsik and Philip Temko
(eds.) Plato on Beauty, Wisdom, and the Arts ( Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield, 1982), p p. 47– 78. Also
see Elizabeth Belfiore, “ A Theory of Imitation in Plato’s Republic,” Transactions of the American Philological
Association, 114( 1984): 121– 1 46; Leon Golden, “ Plato’s Concept of Mimesis,” British Journal of Aesthetics,
15(1975): 118–131; Willem Jacob Verdenius, Mimesis: Plato’s Doctrine of Artistic Imitation and its Meaning to
Us ( Leiden: Brill, 1962).
27 For these discussions, see Plato Republic 3.392c–398b, esp. 393b-c on impersonation; Laws 4.719c–d.
28 Plato Republic 10: generic zôgraphos “ painter,” 596e, 597b, 598a, 598c; graphikê “ art of painting,” 598b;
skiagraphia 602d. On skiagraphia as the use of shading for contour see Demand, “ Plato and the Painters”:
5– 7 ; as a technique resembling pointillism, with color- j uxtaposition, Eva Keuls, “ Plato on Painting,”
The American Journal of Philology, 95( 1974): 100– 127. More recently see Zacharoula Petraki, “ Plato’s
Metaphor of ‘ Shadow Painting’: Antithesis and ‘ Participation’ in the Phaedo and the Republic,” Classical
Journal 114.1( 2018): 1 – 33. Other dialogues sometimes refer to skiagraphia by name: Phaedo 69b, Parmenides
165c–d.
29 Plato Republic 10.596d–e.
30 Plato Republic 10: carpenter and table or couch, 597b– d; flute and bridle, 601c– 602a; lower part of soul
likes erroneous images, 602d–603b.
31 Xenophon Memorabilia 3.10.7–8. This terpsis contains the same root found in the verb terpoit’ that I proposed
for the quote from Aeschylus’ Theoroi, above.
32 Plato Republic 9. 585a– 5 86c. The phantom pleasures in this passage are even said to be eskiagraphêmenais
“ shadow- drawn,” using the verb associated with the noun skiagraphia.
33 Plato Sophist 235d–236c. See Noburu Notomi, “Image-Making in Republic X and the Sophist: Plato’s
Criticism of the Poet and the Sophist,” in Pierre Destrée and Fritz- G regor Hermann ( eds.) Plato and the
Poets (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2011), pp. 299–326.
34 Halliwell, Aesthetics of Mimesis, pp. 62–65, stresses the disagreement between the dialogues, indeed more
than I would. It seems to me safer to read the Sophist as having discovered what it is that really goes
wrong within the genus of mimêsis, and bringing that forward.
35 Plato Republic: describing ideal city like depicting good- l ooking man, 5.472d; establishing constitution
like drawing, 6. 500e– 501c. See Demand, “Plato and the Painters.”
36 Plato Republic 3.400d–401a.
37 Aristotle Politics 8.5 1340a33–40; “signs” 1340a34.
38 Aristotle De Anima 3. 4– 7 , es p. 3.7 431b2: “ that [in the soul] that thinks conceives the forms [eidê]
in the images [phantasmasi].” See Robert Bolton, “ Perception Naturalized in Aristotle’s De Anima,”
in R. Salles (ed.) Metaphysics, Soul, and Ethics in Ancient Thought ( Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2005),
Nickolas
Pappas
92
p p. 209– 224; T. Ebert, “ Aristotle on What is Done in Perceiving,” Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung 37(1983):181–198.
39 Aristotle Poetics 4 1448b18.
40 Aristotle Poetics 6 1 450b1– 2. Note that this point comes up not in a discussion of drawing but as an anal-ogy to dramatic plot. Only by indirection does Aristotle explain visual art. For an attempt to extrapolate from his analogies to an account of visual representation, see Graham Zanker, “ Aristotle’s Poetics and the Painters,” American Journal of Philology 121.2(2000):225–235.
41 Aristotle Poetics 4 1448b10– 13. David Socher argues that this comment about ugly animals creates an in-consistency in Aristotle’s theory: “ Aristotle on Pictures of Ignoble Animals,” Journal of Aesthetic Education 39.2(2005): 27–32.
42 Aristotle Parts of Animals I.5644b23–645a37.
43 Plato Symposium 211b-d.
44 Stephen Halliwell reads Plato Cratylus 431b– d t o allow for this possibility: Aesthetics of Mimesis, p. 45. Halliwell may be right, but this elusive passage does not emphasize that one may draw and represent the general term; one probably has to look in the passage for the possibility ( as Plotinus may well have done). 45 Plotinus Ennead 5.8.1.
46 Plotinus Enneads: mimetic art attuned to sensory objects “ here,” 5.9.11; art as paignion, 4.3.10. The Eleatic Stranger uses paignion in this same context in Plato Statesman 288c; see Halliwell, Aesthetics of Mimesis, p. 318. The connection between Plato and Plotinus is clear enough here; does it account for Clement’s use of a different word athurma “ toy, adornment” to the same effect? It is possible that Clem-ent’s athurma merely substitutes a near- synonym for paignion, but not something to be insisted on given the precedent of 1 Corinthians. See note 7 above.
47 Plotinus Enneads 5.8.1.
48 Plato Republic 10.596b.
49 Cicero De Inventione 2.1.1; also see Pliny Natural History 35.36. The story and its reception are the basis for discussion in Elizabeth C. Mansfield, Too Beautiful to Picture: Zeuxis, Myth, and Mimesis (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007).
50 Homer Iliad: scepter from Zeus to humans, 2. 101– 118; commented on by Nestor, 1. 233– 239.
51 Pausanias, Description of Greece 9.40.11–12.
52 Homer: tomb comprising mound and stone, e.g., Odyssey 12.14; long- l asting marker of remains, as de-scribed by Hector, Iliad 7.85–91; also by Elpenor, Odyssey 11.76; T horn- h ill a.k.a. tomb of Myrina, Iliad 2.813–814.
53 Hans Belting, Likeness and Presence: A History of the Image before the Era of Art, translated by Edmund Jephcott ( Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), p p. 47– 59. The word looks to imply a contrast with the cheiropoiêtoi temples that Paul objects to ( Acts 17.24; cf. 19.26), and to the cheiropoiêta idols that Isaiah 2.18 LXX promises the end of. Such images are sometimes spoken of as the first icons – already in Edward Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, volume 5, chapter 49. I am grateful to Rackstraw Downes for directing me to this chapter.
54 For omphalos-stone as swaddled rock, Hesiod Theogony 498–500, Pausanias Description of Greece 10.24.6. That stone was also called the tomb of Dionysus: Tatian Oration against the Greeks 8.4. On the Hera plank at Samos see Callimachus Aetia fragment 100.
55 Derek Collins, “ Nature, Cause, and Agency in Greek Magic,” Transactions of the American Philologi-cal Association 133( 2003): 39. Collins cites Herodotus 6.61 as one example. Also see Jeremy Tanner, “ Nature, Culture and the Body in Classical Greek Religious Art,” World Archaeology 33(2001): 257–276; Christopher A. Faraone, Talismans and Trojan Horses: Guardian Statues in Ancient Greek Myth and Ritual ( Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992). For cautions against overstated interpretations of the rituals in question, see Sarah Iles Johnston, “ Animating Statues: A Case Study in Ritual,” Arethusa 41(2008): 445–477.
56 Plutarch Moralia: Ilos blinded at Troy, Antylus in Rome, 309f– 3 10a. Pausanias Description of Greece: the Trojan Eurypylos driven mad by statue of Dionysus Aisumnetes, 7.19. 6– 7.
57 An example appears at Herodotus Histories 6.58. See J ean- Pierre Vernant, “ The Figuration of the Invisi-ble and the Psychological Category of the Double: The Kolossos,” in Myth and Thought among the Greeks, translated by Janet Lloyd and Jeff Fort ( New York: Zone Books, 2006), p p. 321– 332, at 322. For more recent discussion of the kolossoi in burial practices, see Christopher A. Faraone, “ Binding and Burying: The Defensive Use of ‘ Voodoo Dolls’ in Ancient Greece,” Classical Antiquity 10(1991): 180–181. Faraone does not however endorse all aspects of Vernant’s reading of the kolossos as double. Thus, e.g., “ Binding and Burying”: 183n.65; and see Georges Roux, “ Qu’ est- c e qu’un kolossos?” Review des Études Anciennes 62(1960):5–40.
Antiquity
93
94
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-12
9
IDEAS OF ART IN THE MIDDLE
AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE
Carole Talon- Hugon
The first difficulty encountered when talking about ideas about art in the Middle Ages is that the concept of “art”
then had neither the meaning nor the extension that it has for us. Coming from the Latin word “ars”
which denoted talent, skill, as well as what these skills apply to, the term “art”
was valid for painting and sculpture, as well as for boiler making, shoemaking, or carpentry. From Aristotle to Duns Scotus, all the authors repeat that these know- how
suppose two elements: one cognitive (the knowledge of the rules allowing to produce), and the other operational (they
relate to doing and not to acting). Art is above all a profession and has no metaphysical autonomy; it is far from divine creation and inferior to nature: “art
is deficient in comparison with natural operation, because nature provides this substantial form, that it is not in the power of art to procure”, writes Saint Thomas (Summa Theologica). Thus, in the Middle Ages, painting or sculpture were arts in the sense of perfect mastery of the norms of a doing.
Within the whole of the “arts” thus understood, the medieval distinction between liberal and
mechanical arts is for us just as strange. Invented in the 5th century by Martianus Capella, the
category of “liberal arts” (grammar, rhetoric, dialectics, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and
music) brought together learned disciplines, taught in schools, and aimed at understanding the
order of discourse and the universe. In front of it, the category of “mechanical arts”, proposed
in the 12th century by Hugues de Saint- Victor, brought together practices which, for their part,
involved manual work carried out in return for payment. There are not only weapons, various
crafts, surgery, but also painting and sculpture.
If, within the very broad set of medieval “arts”, we only retain the activities that we call “arts”
today, a second type of strangeness, this time concerning the forms of these activities, appears.
Thus, the theater in the Middle Ages did not have much to do with the Greek theater, any more
than with the classical theater: in the 11th and 12th centuries the, “liturgical dramas”, staging texts
sacred within the confines of a church, or later, the “Games” (The game of Saint Nicolas, Adam
de la Halle), the “Miracles” (The Miracle of Théophile, de Rutebeuf), the “mysteries”, played on
the church square, or in the town squares, constitute non-
literary, unprofessional dramatic forms,
and most of the time built on anonymous and collective canvas.
Medieval “literature” is first of all made up of hagiographies, stories of exemplary lives, moral
or moral anecdotes, on the model of the ancient exemplum (of the “remarkable life”) (The
Way of
Paradise, by Raoul de Houdenc, 13th century, for example).
As for painting and sculpture, the difference that we moderns make, between artistic image
and religious image, is meaningless. Before being a painting, a Madonna was the Virgin, and
before being a statue, a Christ on the cross was the Son of God and the Savior of men. The distinctions we make between subject and form were outright ignored.
Ideas of Art in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance
95
Finally, a third source of change of scenery: within the field of plastic arts, goldsmithing, illumination, tapestry, or the art of stained glass occupied a place at least as important as painting
and sculpture, and no subcategory of “applied arts” did not come to give them an ancillary status
which would have meant their lower value.
In such a context, the artist, in the modern sense of the term, did not exist. Anyone who practiced sculpture, goldsmithing, or carpentry was, in Latin, an “artifex”, in other words a tradesman.
His status was that of an artisan; he practiced manual skills, against payment, and belonged to the
same lower social category as shoemakers, butchers, or carpenters. This means that the nobles
could not practice these activities without derogating from them unless they did it as amateurs,
out of simple personal taste and in a selfless way.
Like all mechanical arts, painting and sculpture were organized into corporations, which provided mutual assistance between their members and, above all, helped to regulate the rules of
competition in the areas of economic activity concerned. Such a corporate system also supported
the training of apprentices in workshops. The apprentice painter or goldsmith or glazier received
an eminently practical and progressive training there. For the apprentice painter, this meant performing tasks ranging from the simple to the complex (grinding the pigments, preparing the
colors, then painting the backgrounds, the secondary characters, finally representing those in the
foreground, the drapes, the hands, and the faces). The learning was done by direct imitation of
the workshop master’s models, by borrowing from a repertoire of forms and subjects. In this way,
skills were repeated and passed on from generation to generation.
From the craftsman, the painter and the sculptor thus have the social status, the training, the
type of remuneration, the anonymity, and the inscription in a tradition.
But unlike the boilermaker or the butcher, the medieval painter and sculptor carried out most
of their production in a highly spiritualized context which was that of religion. Their art was
mainly deployed in Benedictine monasteries, Cistercian abbeys, Romanesque churches, and
Gothic cathedrals. The salient feature of these thousand years, which stretched from the 5th to
the 15th century, is the fact that the arts developed around the Church, and that their works were
overwhelmingly objects of worship. Also, the experience of these works by their contemporaries
should not be considered under the modern category of “aesthetic experience”. From the Reliquary
statue of Saint Foy de Conques (9th
century) or of the Virgin Imad of Paderborn (11th
century), the
man of the Middle Ages did not expect a pure aesthetic delight, but an aid to prayer, a form of
edification, and a bringing into the presence of the divine.
Because the modern idea of art and the constellation of notions related to it (artist, aesthetic
experience, taste, disinterestedness, genius...) did not exist in the Middle Ages, there was nothing
that resembles it either to a “science of art” or to a “philosophy of art”. But if by “aesthetic” one
understands the style of an era, the principles which underlie it, the way in which one speaks of
the arts, of creation and of the experience of works, then, undoubtedly, the Middle Age, like any
historical period, has an aesthetic of its own.
***
During the first two or three centuries of the Christian era, early Christian art developed on the
basis of the Roman art of the Lower Empire, but with a major shift: the concern for the exterior
form, strictly aesthetic, regresses. The evolution is moving toward less realism in representation,
and more spirituality: forms flatten out, lose their volume, faces and bodies are less individualized,
more solemn. We are very far from the ancient ideal of naturalism, from the illusionist representation of reality, and from the interest in perfect technical mastery.
There is no doubt that these developments are linked to a certain spiritual and intellectual
climate.
Carole Talon-Hugon
96
This climate is that of Christianized Neoplatonism. Plato had conceived the beauties of the
sensible world as the imperfect reflection of the intelligible Idea of beauty, which itself knows no
changes, no degrees, no degradation, and remains identical to itself. The human soul, which has
been in contact with this Idea of the beautiful during its supraterrestrial sojourn (The
Timaeus), retains a confused knowledge of it which can be revived by the sight of sensitive beauty.
To this Platonic legacy, Plotinus added an idea of great consequence for art: that of contemplation. To attain the essence of the beautiful, he argues, man must accomplish a “purification”,
a
work on himself which allows him to abandon the “eye
of the flesh” and become “pure
vision”.
Contemplating is therefore not just a sensitive activity: it is not just opening your eyes and looking; but neither is it a discursive activity: to contemplate is not to reflect. Contemplation is situated
between a sensory activity and an intellectual activity. The experience of painting or sculpture
thus has a spiritual dimension, and a metaphysical utility since it contributes to the conversion of
the gaze and facilitates the ascent of the soul to the regions of the Intellect.
But to accomplish this task, the work must not be chained to the sensible; far from claiming to
be the simple and most faithful replica of the things of nature, it must manifest the victory of spirit
over matter, the triumph of spirit over the materials used.
These Plotinian themes were developed in a remarkable way by Christian thinkers, among
whom Saint Augustine (fourth- to fifth century) and also Pseudo- Dionysius the Areopagite ( fifth- to sixth century) who carried out a synthesis between Greek thought and the Fathers of the
Church by pouring the principles of Christian thought into the neo-
platonic form which he did
by identifying beauty, not with an Idea, but with God. Beyond all the beauties of sensible things,
there is the beauty of God, of which these things are a reflection. To imitate the perfect beauty
of the Plotinian theme, which we find unchanged, then means to imitate God. In his Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, the Pseudo- Dionysius writes:
In the order of sensitive images, if the designer keeps his eyes constantly fixed on the original,
without allowing himself to be distracted by any visible object, without sharing his attention
in any way, it will multiply by two, if one dares to speak thus, the very object, whatever it
is, that it intends to reproduce, just as at this price only it obtains an authentic resemblance
which allows the model to appear under the image which allows the two copies to merge, on
the sole condition that their essence remains distinct.
The “authentic likeness” that the artist must seek must therefore manifest both the presence of the
object and that of God. Painting and sculpture have a theophanic function.
This theoretical atmosphere had certain plastic consequences. First on the subjects represented;
these must be in such a way as to promote contemplation and to help the soul turn toward the invisible. For this, the painter must avoid any overly sensitive representation that would distract the
spirit of the divine: he must dematerialize bodies, make the volume, weight, movement disappear,
in short, everything that refers to matter, everything that refers to the sensitive world and that
classical Greek art had taken so much care to restore meticulously. But he must also avoid all references to feeling, which refers to this mixture of senses and affectivity that is sensitivity; abandon
the pathetic expressiveness of Greek art and paint inexpressive and hieratic figures.
The interweaving of the history of art and that of ideas can be read particularly clearly in the
“Quarrel of Images”, which was the prelude to the schism of the Churches of East and West, and
in which played the destiny of the performing arts for several centuries.
The case began symbolically in 726, when Emperor Leo III, hostile to the visible representation of the invisible God, had the image of Christ that adorned the main door of the imperial
palace in Constantinople destroyed and replaced by a cross. The iconoclasts, of whom he is a
representative, invoked in favor of their position passages from the Old Testament, in particular the
Ideas of Art in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance
97well- known episode of the Golden Calf and the second of the words of the Alliance saying “Thou
shalt not do ‘graven image or any representation of the things which are above in the heavens,
which are below on the Earth, you will not bow down to them and you will not serve them”.
Marked by the Platonic thought for which it is always to be feared that the images will seduce the
soul and divert it from the truth, the first Fathers of the Church (Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian...) were wary of the representation of the visible. Such is the theological climate favoring the
arguments of the iconoclasts.
However, a new idea came to complicate the debate terribly: that of the Imago Dei, the image
of God. The New Testament affirms in effect that Christ is the incarnate image of God. The word
image does not mean here a diminished copy but designates a bond of filiation (cf.
Saint Athanasius of Alexandria, “the incarnation of the Word”, fourth century). We understand the new
deal introduced into art and into the universe of material images by this Christology: could the
material image not in turn embody the mystery of the imago Dei? Yes, and it goes by the name of
the icon. The Christian icon thus opened a middle way between Jewish aniconism (total absence
of images) and pagan idolatry (multiplication of images). The one who draws the most precise
conclusions from this new Christological situation is undoubtedly John Damascene ( seventh- to
eighth centuries), who delivers the first Christian theory of the cult of images. Incarnation authorizes representation. The image of Christ has a theophanic value: it is the place of divine Revelation, and in its very materiality, must allow the downward current through which something of
the model has passed into its representation to be traced. So it can be admired and be the object of
a worship of dulia, which is not the worship of latria only due to God; it being understood that the
first leads to the second. The function of the icon is to establish a spiritual relationship between the
devotee who contemplates, and the reality contemplated. Iconophiles make great use of a formula
borrowed from Saint Basil of Caesarea (fourth century): “The honor given to the image passes
through to the prototype, that is to say to the model, that is to say, that is to say towards God”. It
is precisely this translation which, according to iconophiles, makes it possible to differentiate between the idol and the icon: the idol, the final object of worship; and the icon, to which is carried
an adoration which passes through it, beyond it. The Council of Nicea II (787)
thus put an end to
this medieval quarrel by restoring the cult of images.
But if the representation of the sacred was authorized, it was subject to a certain number of
stylistic constraints which can be deduced from this principle: the plastic expression must maintain sufficient dissimilarities with regard to the world below, and of “resemblances” to the world
beyond. These conventions give the pictorial genre of the icon its so deeply stereotypical character: the characters are not individualized; bodies disappearing under the clothes that cover them;
the face, mirror of the soul, is painted from the front; the eyes are wide open and look at the one
who contemplates them; the forehead is high and rounded, as a sign of spirituality, wisdom, and
intelligence; the nose is long and thin in contrast to the flared noses which refer to animal life;
the mouth is fine so as not to signify sensuality and closed because the exchange of looks takes
place against a background of silence; the space of the painting is not constructed according to the
rules of unified perspective but according to those of inverted perspective, the vanishing point
being located in the eye of the beholder to signify that the icon is addressed to the one who has it
contemplate; the colors are used according to their symbolic value and not for the sake of realism;
icons do not know shadow, since the key word of this aesthetic is light; this light, which is not
material but intelligible, is represented by gold which bathes the painting in a supernatural light.
This set of extremely precise conventions resulted in a faithful perpetuation of the tradition. In
such a theological framework, there is not the slightest place for innovation or originality. All that
matters is the repetition of the same constraints and the same spiritually necessary rules.
If the Council of Nicea II made it possible to draw up the charter of Byzantine art, a set of
treatises known as Libri Carolini, written in the years 792–
794, constitutes the charter of sacred art
Carole Talon-Hugon
98
on the western side. There is a critique of iconophile positions, which does not necessarily mean a
return to iconoclastic positions. This middle position, expressed in the Libri Carolini, was of great
importance for the development of Western art.
For its authors, the icon fails to avoid the trap of idolatry. The cult of icons, even if it is said that
it only passes through the image to go back to its prototype, is suspect. The only way to avoid any
form of idolatry is to desecrate the image, to consider it independent of the prototype. The image
is no longer a relic; being no longer sacred, will not be the object of any kind of worship, not
even of a dulia worship. This does not mean that it no longer has religious utility: it educates the
illiterate, revives the memory of those who already know, and rekindles the flame of faith. From
sacred, art thus becomes religious.
This Western position dramatically changes the status and nature of the image, shifting it from
metaphysical and theological ground to that of psychology and rhetoric. But it is on the artistic
and aesthetic consequences of these theoretical positions that we must insist: the strict constraints
to which the Byzantine icon was held are no longer valid. Paintings and sculptures should be instructive and uplifting, but a new freedom in the manner of carrying out this program is granted.
All kinds of new possibilities open up to representation.
No doubt this is not unrelated to the gradual appearance at the end of the Middle Ages of new
subjects (as we can see, around 1350, with the development of new genres of portrait and landscape), and, even more, new ways of painting.
***
Whoever reads Vasari’s texts on the reception of paintings by Duccio (13th– 14th century) or
Giotto ( 13th– 14th century) cannot doubt that the contemporaries of these painters indeed had the
impression of attending a pictorial revolution. Duccio’s Madonna Rucellai broke with the conservative formulas of painting: it shows new chromatic research, a new linearity of contours (in the
sinuous movement of the golden border of the Virgin’s mantle, or in the flexibility of her head
bearing), a new way of making the Virgin child look at each other, an unpublished composition
of the whole painting, the angels surrounding the Virgin no longer constituting, as in the painting
“in the Greek way” (according to Vasari’s formula), a solemn and static background.
A greater attention to reality, an attentive observation of nature are particularly noticeable
among the painters of northern Europe who compete in the precise and meticulous restitution of
interiors (Van
Eyck) or, of course, in Italy with Giotto. The latter, which alone concentrates the
profound renewal of Western art of image, implements a whole new conception of space giving
the illusion of three- dimensionality. It is about representing the visible as such, and no longer
providing a symbolic means of guiding toward the invisible, with all the necessary distortions that
we have seen at work in icon painting. Not that painting has abandoned its links with religion:
the frescoes in the Basilica of Assisi which paint episodes from the life of Saint Francis represent,
for example, angels, who have no earthly existence; but these are painted according to the visible,
that is to say take the features of small asexual children. This attention to the visible can be read
in the careful reproduction of the attachment of the cross of a church, of the interlacing formed
by ropes, or of the caissons of a ceiling; and also in the painting of the external signs of emotions,
of the gestures and their attitudes which translate them: the inexpressiveness of the icon gives way
to the representation of feelings.
This new way of painting had its theorists. Thus, Alberti in his De pictura writes that “The
painter applies himself to imitating only what is seen under the light”, affirming, after centuries
of refusal of naturalism, the requirement of resemblance to nature. This imitation of nature presupposes the practice of observation, and no longer of borrowing from a pre-
existing repertoire
Ideas of Art in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance
99
of forms and images. Originality takes precedence over conformity. An imperative of direct observation that we also find is formulated by Cennini in Il libro dell’arte (1390), who, for example, advises those who want to paint a mountain to first observe the way in which the light is reflected
on a broken rock. Or even in Dürer who, in the Four Books of the Proportions of the Human Bodies
(1528), invites the painter not to be satisfied with agreed formulas transmitted by the tradition, but
to imitate truthfully by observing the reality attentively and by learning to know it scientifically.
For all these theoretical painters, the artist must open his eyes to exercise his gaze; to use the eye
of the flesh, and no longer the eye of the spirit, as Plotinus wanted.
Learning to represent reality in the most exact way is also to apply the laws of optics to the
construction of the space of the painting. The famous experiment of Filippo Brunelleschi which
consisted in placing a man in a precise point of the place of the Church of Santa Maria dei Fiori in
Florence by asking him to look at the baptistery through a plank pierced with a hole at the height
of his eye, then to substitute for this direct vision that of a painting representing the square, so that
the one who looks through the pierced board does not know when he is looking at the painting
and when he is looking at the square, perfectly sums up the objective sought by the artists of the
time: create a perfect visual illusion. Dürer, an excellent geometer, borrows a lot from Alberti’s
“legitimate construction” who defined the painting as a section of the visual pyramid whose
top is in the painter’s eye, and adds a technical invention to this science of artificial perspective:
the “Dürer window”, a device consisting in inserting between the painter and the object or the
scene to be painted, a squared glass on which the salient points of the contours of the object are
transferred.
***
But new ideas about painting are not just about painting; they also relate to the very nature of this
activity and more generally of those of the drawing arts. This new type of thinking is given in
new types of writing.
Until then, the writings that interested painting and sculpture were of two kinds. Either they
were texts by philosophers or theologians, bearing, as we saw above, on the legitimacy of the
representation of the divine, on beauty, or on the functions and effects of the image. Alongside
this textual production touching on the arts in a way laterally and within the framework of a
larger reflection, there were know- how
manuals, collections of techniques, and practical advice
intended for painters and sculptors.
However, at the beginning of the 14th century in Italy, we saw the emergence of an unpublished literature, bearing on the very activity of the painter and the sculptor and on the singular
status of those who engage in it.
Il libro dell’arte (1390) by Cennino Cennini is a good example of this development. Part of the
work is in the medieval genre of the recipe book (we learn how to make ultramarine blue, prepare
a fresco panel, paint a fishy river, depict wounds, and even keep the squirrel tails intended for to
make brushes without being eaten by the worms). But it also includes more theoretical reflections
presenting the painter’s activity as a vocation, and relying on Horace’s Ars Poetica, to compare
painting and poetry, and grant them equal dignity.
However, it is above all in the work of Leon Battista Alberti, ( 1404– 1472), and more particularly in these three major works that are the De pictura (1435– 1437), the De statua (c. 1445), the De
re ædificatoria ( 1452– 1472), that is formulated for the first time the humanistic and classic theory of
the arts of disegno. Alberti is aware of the novelty of his enterprise: it is not a question, he writes,
of making, “as with Pliny, a history of painting, by focusing on the first painters or the inventors
of painting, but rather to conduct a completely new examination of the art of painting”. If these
Carole Talon-Hugon
100
three works deal with problems specific to painters (perspective, composition, lines, light, colors, etc.), sculptors (how
to enlarge models, etc.), and architects, it is remarkable to read also the
enhancement of the design arts which takes place there through their rapprochement with the
liberal arts.
The same theoretical ambition is found in Dürer’s Four Books of the Proportions of Human Bodies
(1528). He too leans the considerations on pictorial practice to a theoretical reflection which
affirms the nobility of this activity: the apprenticeship of the young painter should no longer be
confined to the acquisition of artisanal know- how.
We must take into account the stars under
which the apprentice was born and his humoral temperament; he must be educated in temperance,
chastity, and love of God, learn Latin in order to have access to humanist culture, but also anatomy
and perspective.
We use the formula of the Epistle to the Pisces of Horace which affirms that poetry is like
painting (Ut pictura poesis), to confer on painting the dignity of poetry. The latter has always
been very far from craftsmanship, manual know- how, and the plastic arts that came under it, and
it touched, since the Ion of Plato, on the divine. To declare that painting is a sister of poetry, and
that it shares its ends (to move, to please, and to educate, according to Horace), was to ennoble it.
Thus, after the Italian humanist Ludovico Dolce ( 1508– 1568) who described the three parts of
painting (invention, drawing, and color) on the model of the three parts of rhetoric (inventio, dispositio, elocutio), the painter Lomazzo ( 1538– 1592) states in his Trattato dell’arte de la pittura (1584) that
there is no true painter who is not a poet: “To paint or verse is to be carried away by the fury of
‘Apollo. One cannot have a painter who does not also have some spirit of poetry”. It is to emphasize the need for painters to have a literary culture: to make the most expressive and appropriate
compositions about them (the notion of convenience plays an important role), the painter must
know the history and ancient and modern literature.
Before the 15th century, there was no theoretical sum on the arts of sight which was equivalent
to the great treatise that Aristotle’s Poetics was for the letters. By maintaining that painting and
poetry are sisters, the doctrine of Ut pictura poesis gives the former the theoretical program of the
latter. The categories of Poetics are thus imported into painting.
This desired ennoblement became effective, as evidenced by the fact that, in his Decameron
( mid- 14th century), Boccaccio makes Giotto dialogue with a lawyer in other words puts on an
equal footing a representative of a liberal art and a representative of what was, until a short time
ago, a mechanical art. Or the fact that in the decoration of the room of Constantine of the Vatican palace, begun by Raphael and completed by the studio of Giulio Romano in 1524, the four
allegories of Fame are not only Physics and History, but also, very new, Painting and Sculpture.
This ennobling of the activity means ennobling of those who practice it. The painters and the
sculptor must now have Letters and master knowledge (anatomy, optics, botany…). Their goal,
says Alberti, is not to get rich, but to gain fame and recognition. This amounts to emphasizing
emphatically that painting is not a profession, a simple mechanical art, paid. It is a liberal art in
the full sense, therefore disinterested. The great painter is a great man in his own right, who has a
right to glory, and, possibly, to posterity. In this way, we come out of the artisanal regime where
anonymous painters and sculptors are paid according to the time spent on the work, in the traditional way.
This glory, however, only halos very few artists then; Giotto, Masaccio, Michelangelo, Leonardo, and Raphael remain exceptional cases. In the shadow of the workshops, the majority of
painters and sculptors continue to work without ever departing from anonymity. But several signs
attest that the status of painter and sculptor is indeed in the process of changing in depth. For example, the appearance of the self- portrait. The artist first represents himself by lending his features
to a character from the painted scene (like
Masaccio ( 1401– 1428) who, in the Brancacci Chapel in
Ideas of Art in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance
101
Florence, painted himself among the crowd assembled around the throne of Saint Peter), then by
making self- portraits assumed as such (like
Lorenzo Ghiberti ( 1378– 1455), sculpting his face on
the portal of the Baptistery in Florence).
A new word was needed to designate this humanist who practices painting or sculpture. The
appearance of the term “artist” which, we repeat, has no Latin equivalent, corresponded to this
need. The first attestation of the word (“artista”) is found in Dante’s Divine Comedy (completed in
1321). It will take two centuries for the term to take hold, and even longer for it to enter common
vocabulary in Europe.
It was in this context that the creation of the Academy of Drawing Arts took place in Florence
in 1563. In this new institution, these arts are no longer learned in a purely empirical way and
by imitation of the workshop master, as was the case in medieval corporations, but presuppose
theoretical lessons. The very name of “Academy” says a lot about the intellectualization of these
practices: to have chosen the name of the philosophical school founded by Plato, it was to place
oneself under the aegis of the one who, in the fresco by Raphael, The School of Athens, shows the
sky, while Aristotle points to the earth; in other words, to put the world of art under the sign of
Ideas and the Intelligible, and to make the art of designo, in the words of Leonardo da Vinci, a “cosa
mentale” far removed from the mechanical arts.
We cannot say enough about the role played among these theorists by the philosopher Marsilio
Ficino ( 1433– 1499). His synthesis of ancient Neo- Platonic thought and Christian revelation had a
considerable influence throughout Europe on the way in which artistic activity, works, and artists
were thought about; particularly because of his theory of creation.
According to Genesis and Christian theology, the notion of “creation” refers to the divine
action which is at the absolute beginning of all things and produces the world ex nihilo, unlike
the demiurge of ancient Greek thought, which organized a state of the world already there. The
activity of creating therefore belongs only to God since it means making something happen out
of nothing. This is to say the novelty introduced by Ficino when he introduced the notion of creation into the lexicon of art. There are men, he asserts, who are endowed with a power of creation
which enables them to produce the microcosm of human work as God produced the macrocosm
of the world. And this is because their soul is not only the anima that connects them to earthly life,
but also the lie turned to God and open to his inspiration. It is this divine enthusiasm that animates
the artist: the Commentary on the Banquet makes poetic fury one of the four forms of divine fury
which uplifts the soul and leads it to great deeds. Love, the desire for beauty, becomes a creative
power. Divine inspiration and the memory of the beautiful that the soul retains from its vision of
essences are thus accorded in the soul of the artist.
This idea of creation not only has the effect of establishing an analogy between the work of
the world and the work of art, and between the macrocosm and the microcosm which are their
respective products: it also establishes a kinship between all the arts. Poetry, architecture, sculpture, and painting feed on the same source, and the latter two should no longer be placed in the
subordinate category of the arts of imitation. Specifically, imitation has changed meaning; it is
no longer that of natural nature but that of natural nature: “Art
imitates nature. Art performs its
works in this order, namely that it prints in a given material such and such forms, none of which
is specific to the material “(Platonic Theology). The artist imitates nature in its functioning, thus
relays the work of divine creation, and in doing so provides it with a new fulfillment. This is to say
the totally new metaphysical power that Ficino grants to human creation. Complementing divine
creation, it increases the glory of the universe by contributing to its beautification.
The sacredness of the work thus migrates to the artist. In his Treatise on Painting Alberti declared: “The painter being able to share something of the divine creator, he can sometimes even
be compared to a god” and in 1512, Dürer wrote:
Carole Talon-Hugon
102
This great art of painting has been, for many centuries, held in high esteem by mighty kings.
They made the fortunes of eminent artists and treated them with honor, understanding that
great masters have some kind of equality with God.
This passage, which reads the combined influence of Ficinian Neoplatonism and German mysticism, shows the rise to power of the figure of the genius artist whose creative power joins that of
God. Dürer also left a sensitive image of it by representing himself in his Self- portrait
of 1500 under
features which are those attributed to Christ.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-13 103
10WHAT WAS FINE ART?
Painting and Sculpture Before and After the Reign of the Fine Arts
Larry Shiner
Although bone flutes have been found dating from 35,000 years ago, the oldest surviving physical examples of what we would unquestionably recognize as art seem to be paintings and sculptures. Some of the cave paintings from Chauvet and elsewhere go back almost 40,000 years as do some carved figures, and Gregory Currie suggests that if we accept a broad understanding of “ art,” some stone axe heads that look like they were shaped primarily for aesthetic reasons mean that the roots of sculpture go back a half million years.1 Of course, some art theorists and philosophers who take the term “ art” to designate primarily those arts traditionally gathered under the concept of “ fine art” might exclude handaxes from “ art” with a capital “ A.” But that traditional, highly restricted, category of fine art that included painting, sculpture, and architecture along with poetry and music at its core was not only a late emergence; consolidated around 200 years ago, it has largely run its course as an organizing category. As a leading historian of Western schemes for classifying the arts has remarked, the reign of a relatively “ homogeneous and autonomous group of fine arts was brief.”2
This essay will not only sketch the story of the emergence and subsequent dilution of the cate-gory of fine art as a social category and practice, foregrounding the role of painting and sculpture as we go, but will also consider the recent arguments of those who deny that “ fine art” was a late emerging phenomenon, and will close by suggesting some implications of the decline of “ fine” art for theories of art and aesthetics. Before embarking on those investigations, I need to make two general comments on the nature of art categories.
First, categories of art and the aesthetic are subject to a process of historical sedimentation. Concepts and ways of acting that were once dominant do not simply disappear but live on in modified form, sometimes partially blending into newer ways of thinking and acting, sometimes simply surviving alongside them. The oldest and still most pervasive use of the term “ art” in West-ern cultures is what we might call the generic or small “ a” sense which goes back to the Greek techne and Latin ars, as when we refer to cooking, teaching, medicine, or politics as arts. In such uses, “ art” can refer to almost any human activity done with an appropriate level of skill, intelli-gence, and grace. ( I use “ grace” to avoid the fraught associations attaching to “ style” or “ beauty.”) But in addition to this extremely broad concept of “ art,” and to the highly restricted and hierar-chical concept of fine art or “ Art” with a capital “ A,” there has been a third general way of using “ art” that will play a role in what follows. This is the use of “ art” with a modifier that identifies groups of arts that have often been regarded as closer to the “ fine” arts than to small “ a” arts such as cooking or carpentry, yet are typically contrasted with the fine arts and regarded as lower in
Larry Shiner
104
What
Was Fine Art?
105
weighed in for painting as the more intellectual and gentlemanly, whereas Michelangelo argued
that each is excellent in its own way.5
Liberti then distinguishes between classifications, which, like comparisons, also typically operate
on some already existing general idea of art, and systems, which seek a unifying principle( s) around
which various component concepts are gathered. As Liberti notes, classifications and systems are
not mutually exclusive. When Batteux made imitation the unifying principle of his system of
the fine arts, he actually presupposed a more general classification of the arts based on the old
liberal arts vs. mechanical arts criteria of pleasure vs. utility.6 As Liberti’s survey of the many
subsequent 19th- century classification schemes reveals, classification by itself can become a rather
dreary academic business. In the late 19th century, however, it was enlivened by more systematic
historian- theorists such as Wolflin, Riegl, and Panofsky, each of whom sought principles for a
Kunstwissenschaft or “ science of art,” drawing their primary examples from painting and sculpture.7
But as later theorists in the 20th century attempted to incorporate more and more new arts into
the category of fine art, it finally became so bloated and unwieldy that the entire classificatory and
systematizing enterprise has come to seem untenable.8 Of course, as Dominic Lopes points out,
there were skeptics about the cogency of the “ fine art” category from early on. Goethe wrote in
1772, that the arts “ classified for purposes of theoretical trickery under the rubric ‘ fine arts’ [are]
no more closely related than the seven ‘ liberal arts’ of the old seminaries.”9
Paradoxically, it has only been in this century that the widely accepted Kristellerian claim that
the system of fine arts is a modern development barely 200 years old has been vigorously attacked.
There have been three major critiques of the Kristeller thesis each varying in tone and perspicuity,
although all argue that the modern category of fine art ( and the aesthetic) can already be found in
Ancient Greece and therefore that “ Art” is not “ modern” after all. The most contentious attack
has been by the classicist, James I. Porter who, among other things, strikes at Kristeller’s rather
casual use of the term “ system” as well as at Kristeller’s stress on a core of five arts as constituting
that system.10 Whereas Porter is primarily concerned to demolish the credibility of Kristeller’s
account in order to make way for his own exploration of aesthetic experience in Ancient Greece,
the two other critiques of Kirsteller argue that the modern category of fine art was already present
in Aristotle. James O. Young’s version of this argument is that since Aristotle calls painting, sculpture,
and music as well as poetry imitative arts Kristeller’s supposed “ modern system” was already
there in Aristotle and simply revived by Batteux and others. The only thing new in Batteux, according
to Young, was the term B eaux- arts. Unfortunately, Young tries to reinforce his claim by
offering a highly selective list of 18th- c entury theorists who seem to support his view, but Young
ignores the numerous 18th- c entury writers who proposed categories of the fine arts consisting of
six, seven, eight, or more arts, and also ignores the fact that several of Batteux’s contemporaries
( Diderot, Mendelssohn, Lessing) rejected imitation as a unifying principle of the arts.11 Indeed,
as Liberti’s history of classifications shows, the “ modern system of the arts” has been unstable and
constantly changing from the beginning.
A far more convincing and balanced critique of the Kristeller thesis than either Porter’s or
Young’s is Stephen Halliwell’s The Aesthetics of Mimesis: Ancient Texts and Modern Problems which
not only offers a thorough study of mimesis in both Plato and Aristotle, but traces Aristotle’s category
of “ mimetic arts” down through leading art theorists to the Romantics. Halliwell convincingly
argues that Aristotle’s idea of mimesis combined a “ w orld- r eflecting” ( imitative) aspect with
a “ world- creating” ( representational) aspect that even included an expressive dimension.12 On this
basis, Halliwell believes that when Aristotle ascribed this dual sense of mimesis to painting, sculpture,
music and poetry, it implied a category of “ imitative arts” that closely resembles the modern
concept of the fine arts.13 Yet Halliwell himself notes that the persistence of the idea of imitative
arts did not “ at all mean underestimating the significance of eighteenth century developments”
such as the “ turning point” marked by the “ model of aesthetic autonomy.”14
Larry Shiner
106
Yet even Halliwell’s critique of Kristeller’s argument for the modernity of the category of fine art suffers from a handicap shared with the critiques of Porter and Young: all three make the same error as Kristeller himself. They focus on chains of ideas and intellectual influences and ignore not only the broader cultural, social, and economic context from which such ideas emerged, but also the changes in patterns of social behavior, practices, and institutions that embodied them. These social and institutional changes gave the category of “ fine arts” as it emerged in the 18th century a much more complex and “ modern” meaning than Aristotle’s “ imitative arts.” Even so, Halliwell’s claim for the persistence of imitative views in theoretical classifications of the arts is not inconsis-tent with the emergence of new meanings tied to new practices and institutions. Thus, one can accept an aspect of continuity in the concept of art from Aristotle to the present, while at the same time recognizing that there has been an even more important discontinuity with respect to many component concepts, behaviors, practices, and institutions.
As I argued in The Invention of Art: A Cultural History, there was a profound transformation in ways of acting as well as thinking with regard to the arts in the 18th century and both the new behaviors and new ideas came to be embodied in distinct new institutions. Together these changes led to the emergence of “ art” as a s emi- autonomous realm within society alongside science, re-ligion, politics, commerce, etc.15 Driven by the rise of a market economy and a growing middle class, these broad changes in the way the arts were produced, circulated and thought about and housed reached a critical mass over the course of the late 18th and early 19th century. From a 17th- c entury world in which most arts were integrated into daily life and there were few separate art institutions, we find most of the modern concepts, practices, and institutions of art in place by the early 19th century.
Whereas Kristeller and his critics focused on the concept of fine art with a side glance at the parallel emergence of the concept of the aesthetic, I believe one should also attend to the emer-gence of the modern concept of the artist and the ways the post- r omantic ideal of the artist was also expressed in new practices and institutions. Consider, for example, the status of painters, who despite the increased prestige of court painters and a few outstanding individuals in the Renais-sance, were still struggling for “ liberal arts” status throughout most of Europe in the 17th century. Even at the beginning of the 18th century, some painters we now celebrate as fine artists might decorate carriages or make shop signs alongside their easel works. By the end of the century in-tellectual arguments contrasting genius to rule and creativity to invention had become embodied in a variety of practices and institutions leading to a clearer division between easel painters and decorative painters. For example, academies of painting and sculpture, which first emerged in Renaissance, now proliferated across Europe, at the same time that the development of commer-cial paints meant decorative painters did not even need to understand how to create their own colors. Or consider that during the earlier part of the century, catalogues of salon paintings listed paintings by their placement on the walls, but toward the end of the century paintings began to be listed by the artist’s name. Thus, it is no surprise to discover that at the beginning of the 18th century the dictionaries of the major European languages used the terms “ artist” and “ artisan” interchangeably, but by the end of the century, the two terms were beginning to be defined as opposites.16
The other major conceptual and behavioral turn toward the modern complex of practices and institutions we call “ Art” was the emergence in the 18th century of the term “ aesthetic” as the name for a distinctive kind of reflective experience unlike the many traditional ways of appre-ciating art works made for a particular purpose or place, such as Horace’s “ please and instruct.” The new idea of the aesthetic came in many versions, of which the Kantian “ disinterested con-templation” of art or nature “ for itself,” was only one. Yet of equal importance to the purely conceptual aspects of the idea of the aesthetic is the fact that the aesthetic like the new ideal of the artist was also embodied in new practices and i nstitutions— such as the appropriate behaviors that
What Was Fine Art?
107
were being established for contemplating painting and sculpture in the newly emerged public art
museums. The transformation of the Louvre into an art museum during the French Revolution is
particularly instructive for understanding the way in which concepts of art and the aesthetic and
social practices of art are intertwined. The overthrow of the French monarchy in 1792 precipitated
a crisis for the conservation of painting and sculpture, since not only citizen mobs, but also many
revolutionary officials, began destroying paintings and sculptures representing the monarchy.
During the intense debate in the National Assembly between the advocates of preservation and
the champions of destruction, a deputy named Pierre Cambon argued that by creating a museum
and putting images related to the royalty in it, “ we will destroy the idea of royalty” and at the same
time, “ preserve masterpieces.”17 Cambon recognized that a museum would neutralize the signs
of royalty, leaving paintings and sculptures only works of art to be appreciated for their formal,
or aesthetic value.18 The neutralizing and aestheticizing power of the museum, of course, had a
similar effect on religious works, which is why the art theorist Quatremère de Quincy denounced
Napoleon’s stripping of Italian Churches for the benefit of the Louvre. Quatremère’s objection was
not that Napoleon treated art works as spoils of war but that he wrenched paintings and sculptures
from the places for which they were created and where they could speak to people’s deepest feelings.
But in the art museum, he wrote, one will consider only their formal and technical merit,
“ bodies without soul, empty simulacra.”19
By the 1830s, “F ine Art,” or “ Art” in the singular had become the name of a m ulti- dimensional
cultural complex involving such things as: new statuses ( the definitive separation of “ artist” from
“ artisan”), new normative concepts ( creation, originality, aesthetic), new practices ( an end of
recycling and borrowing in music, a new importance for the signature in painting), new institutions
( secular concert halls, separate art auctions, art exhibitions, art museums), and new ideals of
behavior ( silent listening and contemplative looking). By the 1830s and 1840s, the conjunction of
these new concepts, practices, institutions, and behaviors resulted in the emergence of a recognizable
social domain paralleling the domains of religion, politics, commercial life, etc. Intellectuals
in both Germany and in America began to note the existence of this new social domain called
“ art” ( the term was already beginning to be used without the modifier “ fine”). Heinrich Heine
wrote in 1830 that parts of the cultured elite in the Germanys “ regard art as an independent
second world which they rank so highly that all activities of human b eings – their religion, their
morality – course along below it.”20 And Ralph Waldo Emerson declared in his 1841 essay “ Art”
that “ a true announcement of the law of creation... would carry art up into the kingdom of nature,
and destroy its separate and contrasted existence.”21
As Heine’s and Emerson’s comments suggest, from the Romantic period on, this new complex
of ( fine) art, artist, and aesthetic, and its institutions achieved a kind of apotheosis for parts of the
cultured elite. By the turn of the 20th century, the ideal figure of the artist as creative genius and
prophet of the new religion of Art was paralleled by views of aesthetic experience such as those
of Marcel Proust or Clive Bell that treated Art as a species of spiritual revelation. Obviously, large
parts of the middle class public did not fully embrace the extreme perspective that treated art as
a religious substitute. Moreover, it took most of the 19th century to teach the lesser strata of the
new art public the proper aesthetic behaviors of reverent listening and contemplative looking appropriate
to concert halls and art museums.
If the new cultural complex of “ art” in its various conceptual, social, and institutional aspects
was firmly in place by the last half of the 19th century, the more restricted set of arts that had
formed the original core of the fine arts category began to expand by the century’s end. In the case
of the novel, for example, Henry James argued in an 1884 essay that the contemporary novel is not
merely “an art,” but “ one of the fine arts.”22 In the case of photography, although some writers had
claimed that the best works of photography should be considered fine art since the 1850s, it was
only between 1890 and 1910 that a few art museums began to show photographs “ as art,” and it
Larry
Shiner
108
took another three decades for art photography along with its canon of masters and masterpieces to be widely accepted as fine art. Then came the turn of film, which faced the complaint that it was aimed at entertainment rather than at deep aesthetic appreciation, but soon film was also ac-cepted as a potential medium for fine art. Yet these new arts did not displace the established role of painting and sculpture as the leading visual art forms until the 1960s when the once relatively restricted fine art category itself began to unravel.
Although the “ a nti- a rt” experiments of Dada and Futurism in the early 20th century had momentarily caught the attention of a few in the art world, in the early 1960s D uchamp- i nspired experiments with ready- m ades and mixed media began to radically expand the category of fine art. As Pop Art, Happenings, installation art, performance art, earth art, video art, and concep-tual art movements burgeoned, painting and sculpture began to lose their supremacy among the visual arts, although in an influential 1979 essay, the critic Rosalind Krause spoke of some of these post- m odern tendencies as “ sculpture in the expanded field.”23 Twenty years later Krause coined a more general term, “ p ost- m edium,” that nicely suggests the w ide- o pen experimentation with new materials during the second half of the 20th century, as artists used everything from fat, felt, and food, to store- bought objects or their own bodies as media, or, in the case of some conceptual art, employed no material at all.24 At the same time, practitioners and admirers of many of the once lesser ranked applied, craft, decorative, design, or popular arts came knocking at the door of the fine arts club. Serious theoretical claims have been made in recent decades for everything from comics to perfume. As a result of these continuing additions to what might count as works of fine art, the category has become so diluted as to be almost unrecognizable and would seem even less likely to offer a basis for a theory of art or the arts than it did in Goethe’s day. Of course, the demise of “ fine art” as a coherent list of arts, has not affected the existence of “ art” as a distinct, if vaguely circumscribed, social domain of beliefs, concepts, behaviors, and institutions.
In Beyond Art, Lopes offers a useful clarification of this outcome by distinguishing a theory of art or the arts, which attempts to say what makes anything a work of art, from our folk concept of the arts. The latter helps us “ detect” art, something Noel Carroll has also observed, by allowing us to apply a variety of conventional criteria developed over time, but without attempting to unify them in a philosophical theory. As Lopes concludes, “ what a close investigation of the history of admissions and expulsions from the club of the arts might reveal is not what makes an activity an art but rather what features we happen to be looking for in acknowledging it to be an art.”25 Thus, when it comes to the question of deciding whether some new candidate art ( comics, video games) should be admitted into the panoply of the arts, Lopes proposes that instead of seeking a global theory of art to do the job, we should pursue local analogies with similar arts that have already been accepted. Arguments based on an analogy with painting, for example, were one of the ways photography, and later quilts, got into the art club. It is a rough and imprecise method and Lopes concludes that it may even lead us to suspect that “ the clique” of the ( fine) arts “ is not much more than a matter of convenience.” 26
Nicholas Wolterstorff’s Art Rethought: The Social Practices of Art locates the failure of the mod-ern “ fine art” category elsewhere. For Wolterstorff, the problem is not that the fine art category has become so diluted as to be of little use as a guide to art theory, but that a particular version of the fine art tradition has misled philosophical aesthetics to overlook certain arts and especially certain responses to art that have never fit the idea of contemplative appreciation appropriate to the art museum.27 Like a latter day Quatremère de Quincy, he is sensitive to the ways other than aesthetic contemplation that art works made for a purpose and place invite us to engage with them, e.g. touching, kissing, crying, working, meditating, praying. With respect to painting, he considers in depth the practice of touching and kissing icons in the Orthodox tradition of ven-eration. With respect to sculpture and architecture, he writes sensitively about the purposes and ways of engagement with memorial art such as the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington
What Was Fine Art?
109
where the responses of touching and crying or of meditating at the same time as we notice our
own image reflected in the polished surface are more appropriate responses than a focus on the
formal qualities of the design. Through an analysis of many other types of art, such as work songs
or hymns, that have also been generally ignored by philosophical aesthetics, Wolterstorff drives
home the point that the mainstream tradition of philosophical aesthetics has for too long missed
the bulk of the art that surrounds us. The many kinds of arts Wolterstorff discusses are a reminder
of the point I made at the beginning of this essay about the process of sedimentation. Although
these arts have been largely ignored by philosophical aesthetics until recently, they have been
there all along, but since they were outside the pale of “ fine art,” they were not believed worthy
of attention, unless wrenched from their original contexts and uses and treated purely as “ art”
intended for contemplation.
Given the continuing dilution of the category of fine art today, it is no surprise that Lopes calls
for working on theories of the individual arts and Wolterstorff calls for recognize other kinds of
arts and other ways of engaging with them. But as different as Lopes’ and Wolterstorff’s responses
are to the fate of the “ fine art” category, both share a belief that all arts should be understood as
social practices, a belief that many other contemporary aestheticians have also embraced, and that
transforms the question of classification from one of making lists based on conceptual criteria
as both Kristeller and his critics have done, to examining how such concepts play out in norms,
behaviors, and institutions. As for painting and sculpture, which once stood high above all other
visual arts along with architecture, the abandonment of the exclusiveness implied by the category
“ fine art” has not resulted in demotion but liberation. Traditional forms of religious painting and
sculpture can now be approached by aesthetics in a richer and more holistic way. And both contemporary
art sculpture and painting ( the latter periodically declared “ dead” from the time of the
invention of photography) have responded with astonishing alacrity to the constant the arrival of
the many new experimental art forms.
Notes
1 Gregory Currie, “ The Master of the Masek Beads: Handaxes, Art, and the Minds of Early Humans,”
in Elisabeth Schellekens and Peter Goldie ( ed.), The Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2011), 1 0– 11.
2 Giuseppe Di Liberti, Le Systeme des Arts: Histoire et Hypothese ( Paris: Libraire Philosophque J. Vrin, 2016),
71. This is a somewhat modified version of the Italian original published in 2009.
3 David Davies speaks of these sorts of art as living on the “ margins” of ( fine) art proper. See his Art as
Performance ( Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2004).
4 Liberti, Le Systeme des Arts, 63–64.
5 Liberti, Le Systeme des Arts, 46–47.
6 Liberti, Le Systeme des Arts, 154. Batteux actually has a tripartite scheme in which the fine arts are set in
opposition to the mechanical arts based on the pleasure vs. utility criterion, but architecture and rhetoric
are given an intermediate status since they combine pleasure and utility.
7 Liberti, Le Systeme des Arts, 69–180.
8 This does not prevent Liberti from proposes his own “ open” system of concepts that he says are “ for”
art, rather than “ of “ art. Liberti, Le System des Arts, 201–226.
9 Cited in Dominic McIver Lopes, Beyond Art ( Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), 119.
10 As I show in my rebuttal of Porter, Kristeller did not make the mistake of reifying a “ core” of only five
arts, but Kristeller did invite misunderstanding by his rather casual use of the term “ system.” Some of the
same problems cling to Liberti’s use of “ system,” although he shows an acquaintance with the classical
“ systems theory” of L. von Bertalanffy and Norbert Wiener. For my commentary on Porter’s essay, see
“ Continuity and Discontinuity in the Concept of Art,” British Journal of Aesthetics, 49:2 (2009), 159–169.
11 For details see Larry Shiner, The Invention of Art: A Cultural History ( Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2001), 80–87.
12 Stephen Halliwell, The Aesthetics of Mimesis: Ancient Texts and Modern Problems ( Princeton: Princeton
University, 2002), 22–24, 159–64.
Larry
Shiner
110
13 Halliwell, Mimesis, 8.
14 Halliwell, Mimesis, 12.
15 Had Halliwell’s book appeared a year before mine rather than a year after, I would have integrated his argument into my discussion. Of course, there are other things I would have to modify were I writing the book today. For example, I would have to revise aspects of my treatment of the concept of “ the aesthetic” since, as Paul Guyer has pointed out, both Kristeller and I treat a certain view of aesthetic au tonomy as more normative than it was. See Paul Guyer, A History Modern Aesthetics, Vol. I: The Eighteenth Century ( Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), 2 8– 29. Another strategic error I would have to correct would be to find an alternative to the way I use the term “ craft,” which I anachronistically treated as equivalent to “ mechanical arts” prior to the 19th century. But as Glenn Adamson shows, “ craft” only got its contemporary meaning in the late 19th century when it emerged along with terms like “ applied arts,” “ decorative arts,” and “ minor arts” as replacements for the long defunct “ mechanical arts.” See Glenn Adamson, The Invention of Craft 2012.
16 Shiner, The Invention of Art,99–105.
17 The deputy was Pierre Cambon. The relevant texts of the debate can be found in Edouard Pommier, L’Art de la Liberté Doctrines et Débats de la Révolution Française ( Paris: Gallimard, 1991), 104, 106.
18 Of course, Cambon did not use the term “ aesthetic” which only came into general circulation decades late
19 Quatremère de Quincy, Considerations Morales sur la Destination des Ouvrages de l’art ( Paris: Fayard, 1989), 26.
20 Heinrich Heine, The Romantic School and Other Essays ( New York: Continuum, 1985), 34.
21 Ralph Waldo Emerson, The Complete Essays and Other Writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson ( New York: Modern Library, 1950), 313–314.
22 Shiner, The Invention of Art, 227.
23 Rosalind Krause, “ Sculpture in the Expanded Field,” October8 (Spring 1979), 30–44.
24 Rosalind Krause, A Voyage on the North Sea: Art in the P ost- Medium Condition ( London: Thames & Hud son, 2000).
25 Dominic McIver Lopes, Beyond Art ( Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), 116.
26 Lopes, Beyond Art, 124.
27 Nicholas Wolterstorff, Art Rethought: The Social Practices of Art ( Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-14 111
11EARLY MODERN EUROPEAN PHILOSOPHY OF PAINTING AND SCULPTURE
J. Colin McQuillan
1 Introduction
The early modern period in European philosophy ( c. 1 600– 1 800) was characterized by invention and transformation. The most famous philosophers from this period – Thomas Hobbes, René Descartes, Baruch Spinoza, John Locke, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, David Hume, and Immanuel Kant – all claimed to have invented new sciences or to have dramatically changed the method, content, or classification of scientific knowledge. Hume’s science of human nature stands as a prominent example of the former tendency ( invention), while Kant’s claim to have finally made metaphysics a science through his critique of pure reason could serve as an example of the lat-ter tendency ( transformation) ( Hume 1978: x iii– xix; Kant 1998: 1 09– 120). Either way, whether through invention or transformation, early modern philosophers took themselves to have changed the face of human knowledge.
Aesthetics was one of the new sciences that were introduced during the early modern period, though, in its original form, it was very different from what philosophers today would call aes-thetics.1 The German philosopher Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten introduced aesthetics in his dissertation Reflections on Poetry ( 1736) as a science of confused sensible cognition that would complement logic, understood as the science of distinct intellectual cognition ( Baumgarten 1954: 77– 79). It was only through considerable disagreement among philosophers – n otably Kant, who considered aesthetics a critique of taste; Schelling, who first identified aesthetics and the philoso-phy of art; and Hegel, who insisted that its proper name is not aesthetics or the philosophy of art, but the philosophy of fine art – that aesthetics finally became the part of philosophy concerned with questions about art, beauty, and criticism ( Hegel 1975, Vol. 1: 1; Schelling 1989: 8; Kant 1998: 156). These disagreements lasted throughout the 19th and 20th centuries and, to a certain extent, continue today, as philosophers try to define what aesthetics is; to distinguish aesthetic objects, properties, experiences, and attitudes from other kinds of things; to identify the methods aesthetics should employ; and to explain how aesthetics relates to other parts of philosophy.
Painting and sculpture were implicated in the wave of invention and transformation that changed the face of European philosophy during the early modern period, even though none of the most famous philosophers from this period wrote treatises on the plastic arts.2 The intro-duction of aesthetics also had important consequences for philosophical debates about painting and sculpture, though Baumgarten and Kant had little to say about them. In what follows, I will consider a series of works by and debates among less w ell- known philosophers from the early modern period that deal with painting and sculpture more directly. I will focus on accounts of
J. Colin McQuillan
112
the origins of painting and sculpture and the light they shed on the nature of the plastic arts; the
implications of the comparative judgment of ancient and modern art for the evaluation of painting
and sculpture; and, finally, the classification of painting and sculpture in the new systems of
science, philosophy, and human knowledge that were proposed during the early modern period.
My goal, in each of these sections, is to identify philosophically novel and relevant features of early
modern discussions of painting and sculpture that will clarify for the reader what is distinctive
about this period.
2 The Origins of Painting and Sculpture
Early modern philosophy was not as clearly distinguished from other scientific and humanistic
pursuits as philosophy is today, so we should not be surprised to find several early modern philosophers
engaging in q uasi- historical speculation about the origins of painting and sculpture. These
speculations are important, because they illuminate the nature of the plastic arts and the specific
differences between painting and sculpture, as they were understood at the time.
Some early modern philosophers sought the origins of painting and sculpture in human nature
and, in particular, in the pleasures of the senses. In his essay “ Pleasures of the Imagination” ( 1712),
Joseph Addison follows Aristotle in maintaining that “ our sight is the most perfect and most delightful
of all our senses” ( Addison 1891: 713). Addison remarks that
The sense of feeling can indeed give us a notion of extension, shape, and all other ideas that
enter at the eye, except colors; but at the same time, it is very much straitened and confined
in its operations, to the number, bulk, and distance of its particular objects.
( Addison 1891: 714)
“ Our sight,” he continues,
Seems designed to supply all these defects, and may be considered as a more delicate and diffusive
kind of touch, that spreads itself over an infinite multitude of bodies, comprehends the
largest figures, and brings into our reach some of the remote parts of the universe.
( Addison 1891: 714)
Because sight and touch, in particular, are the source of the majority of our ideas, Addison concludes
that they are also sources of pleasure. He defines the pleasures of imagination as those that
arise “ from visible objects, either when we have them actually in view, or when we call up their
ideas into our minds by paintings, statues, descriptions, or any the like occasion” ( Addison 1891:
714). This casts the plastic arts as representations of objects “ that are actually before our eyes,
or that once entered in at our eyes, and are afterwards called up into the mind” ( Addison 1891:
730). The pleasures of painting and sculpture are, consequently, “ secondary pleasures” that follow
from the “ primary pleasures” of seeing and touching. This is confirmed in later parts of the essay,
where Addison distinguishes the kind of representations found in statuary, painting, and poetic
description. He holds that statuary is the most natural form of representation, because it most
closely resembles the object it represents, presumably because it is t hree- dimensional. Painting is
less natural than sculpture, in terms of representation, because it is t wo- d imensional; yet it is more
naturalistic than poetic description, because a painting resembles an object in a way that language
does not. In every case, Addison concludes, the pleasures of painting and sculpture derive from
the representation of objects, which appeals to our senses and to our nature.
Other early modern philosophers, like Johann Joachim Winckelmann, sought to explain the
origins of painting and sculpture through religion. Like Addison, Winckelmann grants priority
Early Modern European Philosophy of Painting and Sculpture
113
to sculpture over painting and poetry in his History of Ancient Art ( 1765); however, he does so for
a very different reason. Winckelmann grants that art remains “ a daughter of pleasure,” but he
also contends that, at the heart of aesthetic pleasure, there is necessity. This necessity inspired
artistic invention “ in a similar way among all the nations by which it has been cultivated,” beginning
with the ancient Egyptians and Chaldeans. Winckelmann maintains that the first works
of art created by these ancient peoples “ probably represented for worship, under a material form,
the higher powers, whose existence they had imagined at an earlier period than the Greeks”
( Winckelmann 1873: 193). This implies, and Winckelmann confirms, that sculpture is the first
of the arts to emerge, prior to painting, poetry, or music. And, even though he thinks it arises
from an essentially religious impulse, Winckelmann recognizes that sculpture soon took on a life
of its own. His History traces the progress of sculpture from the Egyptians, Phoenicians, Persians,
and Etruscans to its perfection by the ancient Greeks, describing how their first sculptures were
made from clay, carved from wood, cast in brass, and, later, covered in gold leaf. Concerning
their form, Winckelmann suggests that the first sculptures represented the gods through “ a rude
block or square stone,” to which heads were later affixed. “ At the commencement,” Winckelmann
says, “ there was observable on the middle of these stones with heads merely the difference in sex,
which an i ll- s haped face probably left doubtful” ( Winckelmann 1873: 197). In time, however,
sculptural representations of the human form became more refined and gradually gave rise to
drawing, which began as an outline or delineation of sculptural forms in two rather than three dimensions.
Painting emerged as these outlines became more complex and color was added to form.
Among the Egyptians, the figures represented in both sculpture and painting remained “ straight
and motionless,” while later, with the Greeks, they expressed “ a noble simplicity and sedate grandeur
in gesture and expression” that represents for Winckelmann the perfection of the plastic arts
( Winckelmann 1767: 30; Winckelmann 1873: 199).
Winckelmann does not credit any particular nation or people with the invention of art, because,
he says, “ every nation has found within itself the first seed of those things which are indispensable”
( Winckelmann 1873: 193). Johann Gottfried Herder challenges that assumption,
reflecting the rising tide of historicism and nationalism at the end of the 18th century. An early
expression of Herder’s view can be found in his fragment “ On the Transformation of the Taste of
Nations in the Course of the Ages” ( c. 1766), which compares geological transformations in the
Earth to historical changes in the race, form of life, mentality, and taste of different nations; and in
his This Too A Philosophy of History for the Formation of Humanity ( 1774), which argues that the character
of different races and peoples is shaped by their environment, giving rise to diverse cultural
forms, artistic styles, and tastes (Herder 2002a: 255–266, 272–361, esp. 291–299). Winckelmann
took an interest in the same subjects, though he thought geography and climate affected the form
that artistic expression takes and the degree of perfection it attains, instead of seeing them, as
Herder does, as the conditions of particular art forms. While, in his Sculpture ( 1778), Herder will
claim that the forms of sculpture “ are as constant and eternal as pure and simple human nature,”
his subsequent remarks suggest a more radical thesis: “ God gave to one people… the space, time,
and leisure to divine and give shape to things that would remain as permanent monuments for all
subsequent ages and peoples” ( Herder 2002b: 60). Greek sculpture remains “ a model of good
form,” in a way that Chinese and European fashion does not, because Herder credits the Greeks
with an appreciation of nature, sensitivity, and simplicity that was not found in other peoples. He
is even more explicit about the historical and cultural specificity of painting, whose forms he calls
“ an image of their age and vary in accordance with history, peoples, and times” ( Herder 2002b:
60). The only thing that unifies them is light, which Herder describes as “ an enchanted ocean”
that “ flows in every direction from a single point of light on a flat canvas, binding together every
object into a new and unique creation” ( Herder 2002b: 62). Still, the unity that light bestows on
painting is offset by the diversity achieved by chiaroscuro, which, “ as long as it is not made to depend
J.
Colin McQuillan
114
on the fixity of sculpture, borrowing from what is dead, creates a magic panel of transformation, a sea of waves, stories, and figures, each of which dissolves into one another” on the canvas ( Herder 2002b: 62). The play of unity and diversity that Herder identifies in these passages seems to mirror the dynamic tension between universal form, the character of different nations and peoples, and the cultural forms of their artistic expression that characterizes his understanding of the origin of the plastic arts.
3 Ancient and Modern Painting and Sculpture
Alongside their speculations about the origins of painting and sculpture, which, we have seen, also concern the nature and specific differences of the plastic arts, many early modern philoso-phers engaged in comparative qualitative judgments about the relative merits of ancient and mod-ern painting and sculpture. These comparative judgments set the stage for more w ide- ranging debates about the principles of critical judgment and the standards of taste with which contem-porary philosophers are more familiar, but which often focused on literature and neglected the plastic arts.
When they turned their attention to the difference between ancient and modern art, some early modern philosophers rated modern painting and sculpture quite highly, in some cases de-claring them superior to their classical predecessors. In “ The Century of Louis the Great” ( 1687), the poem that set off the “ quarrel between the ancients and the moderns” in the French Academy, Charles Perrault took a rather extreme position, dismissing the “ trifling” skill of ancient paint-ers, who, he says, “ knew no more than their admirers do now” ( Perrault 1714: 193). Instead, he praises “ the masters of the latter age,” including the “ immense genius” of Raphael, whose “ lively pencil had a matchless turn,” and the “ inimitable hand” of Charles Le Brun, whose “ famous works in ages yet to come, shall be admired by posterity” ( Perrault 1714: 194– 195). Perrault goes on to mock ancient sculpture, particularly the Laocoon, because it is so poorly proportioned, and because Laocoon’s sons look more like dwarves than children. He contends that an “ impartial judge, who dares believe his eyes,” will find the sculptures by Girardon that Louis XIV had installed at Versailles to be vastly superior to the works of any of the ancient masters ( Perrault 1714: 195– 196). The judgment of William Wotton, a distinguished classicist and member of the British Royal Society, is more tempered. After surveying ancient achievements in grammar, rhetoric, and poetry in his Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning ( 1694), Wotton says he was initially inclined to grant the superiority of ancient painting, sculpture, and architecture. He feels obliged to defer to the judgment of those who are most knowledgeable about these arts, particularly masters like Michelangelo and Bernini, who, he says, “ did always ingenuously de-clare, that their best pieces were exceeded by some of the ancient Statues still to be seen at Rome” ( Wotton 1694: 62). But then Wotton quotes long passages from Perrault’s Parallel of the Ancients and Moderns ( 1688– 1696) on the shortcomings of ancient sculpture and the beauties of modern painting – particularly the works of Raphael, Titian, Poussin, and Le Brun – that he finds both authoritative and compelling. In the end, Wotton concludes that “ we have had masters in both these arts, who have deserved a rank with those that flourished in the last age, after they were again restored to these parts of the world” ( Wotton 1694: 79). He considers this quite an accom-plishment for the modern art, given the great reputation of ancient painting and sculpture during the early modern period.
Other early modern philosophers defended the ancients and rejected claims about the equal-ity, much less the superiority, of modern painting and sculpture. William Temple, in his Essays on Ancient & Modern Learning ( 1690), mourns the loss of the wisdom of the ancients with as much vehemence as Perrault had mocked them in “ The Century of Louis the Great.” At one point,
Early Modern European Philosophy of Painting and Sculpture
115
Temple even uses ( what he takes to be) the general agreement about the perfection of ancient art
as evidence of the philosophical, scientific, and literary achievements of antiquity, asking
May there not have been, in Greece or Italy of old, such prodigies of invention and learning
in philosophy, mathematics, physics, oratory, poetry, that none has ever since approached them, as
well as there were in painting, statuary, architecture, and yet their unparalleled and inimitable
excellences in these are undisputed?.
( Temple 1909: 20)
Later, he acknowledges that the moderns had made some progress in the arts of painting and sculpture
during the renaissance but insists that this was a “ great but short flight” ( Temple 1909: 30).
Temple laments that “ we have not had one master in either [painting or sculpture] who deserved
a rank with those that flourished in that short period after they began among us” ( Temple 1909:
30). Not all of the early modern admirers of the ancients were as pessimistic about the prospects of
modern art as Temple was. We have already seen that Winckelmann thought the ancient Greeks
perfected the art of sculpture, but that does not mean he thought modern painting and sculpture
was corrupt or inferior. In his Reflections on the Imitation of Greek Works in Painting and Sculpture,
Winckelmann insists that “ there is but one way for the moderns to become great, and perhaps,
unequalled; I mean, by imitating the ancients” ( Winckelmann 1767: 2). He goes on to praise
Michelangelo, Raphael, and Poussin for having studied “ the performances of the ancients” and
imbibing “ taste at its source” ( Winckelmann 1767: 3). Yet he does not think these artists slavishly
copied ancient models, out of deference to tradition, or conforming their own taste and skill to
those who came before them. Instead, he thinks that great modern artists learned to imitate the
ideals of beauty they found in Greek and Roman art. The imitation of the ancients is, for Winckelmann,
just an effective way to learn to imitate what is beautiful.
Early modern debates about the relative merits of ancient and modern art did not just dwell on
generalizations about the perfection of the arts, their progress or decline at one time or another,
or the need to imitate classical models. The participants in these debates often appealed to specific
characteristics of ancient and modern painting and sculpture, as well as numerous examples,
to justify claims about the relative superiority or inferiority of one period or another. In passages
from his Parallel quoted by Wotton, Perrault focuses on the inability of Greek sculptors to
shape the folds of clothing and drapery, as well as their failure to observe the rules of perspective
in b as- r elief. Winckelmann, in his Reflections, emphasizes the naturalism of Greek painting and
sculpture, their contours, drapery, and the moderation we find in their expressions of emotion.
Discussions about these qualities and comparative judgments about them inspired a great deal of
critical debate among early modern philosophers. Winckelmann is, for example, more charitable
in his judgment of clothed figures in ancient sculptures than Perrault; yet his claims about the
expression of emotion in ancient art were fiercely contested by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing in his
Laocoon ( 1766) ( Winckelmann 1767, 30, Lessing 2003: 2 8– 36). These debates cannot be settled
here, and, even if they could, the results would probably be more interesting to critics and historians
of art than to philosophers. It is worth noting, however, that critical debates are extremely
relevant to discussions about the principles of critical evaluation and the standards of taste that we
find in early modern philosophy. These discussions often appealed to specific examples of critical
judgments about works of art to support their claims that beauty should be judged according to a
work’s perfection, the agreement of its parts, the degree to which it exhibits unity amid variety,
its ability to express emotion or arouse the passions of a spectator, the social authority of the critic,
or the place and time where it was produced. That is why comparative judgments of ancient and
modern art are so important for early modern philosophy of painting and sculpture; they are the
supporting evidence that justifies more general philosophical claims about criticism and taste.
J. Colin McQuillan
116
4 The Classification of Painting and Sculpture
In addition to accounts of the origins of the plastic arts and the comparison of ancient and modern painting and sculpture, early modern philosophers made a concerted effort to construct systems of the arts that mirrored the systems of philosophy and the sciences that they were developing at the same time. Indeed, the more comprehensive of these systems included philosophy, science, and the arts in an ambitious attempt to order all of human knowledge.
Charles Batteux is often credited with inventing “ the modern system of the arts,” but his most famous work, The Fine Arts Reduced to a Single Principle ( 1746), has little to say about painting and sculpture.3 Batteux begins by dividing the arts into three types, distinguishing each one “ on the basis of the ends towards which they are directed” ( Batteux 2015: 3). The first type of art is de-signed “ to serve the needs of the people, whom nature seems to abandon as soon as they are born” Batteux 2015: 3). The second type, which Batteux calls “ the fine arts par excellence,” is a source of pleasure, while the third type combines utility and pleasure. The mechanical arts are identified with the first type of art; music, poetry, painting, sculpture, and dance constitute the second type; and rhetoric and architecture belong to the third type. The discussion that follows focuses on the fine arts or those arts that serve no other purpose than pleasure. Batteux first presents a general argument supporting the claim that the fine arts “ select the beautiful parts of nature and form them into an exquisite whole, more perfect than nature, without ceasing to be natural” ( Batteux 2015: 4). The imitation of belle nature is thus, for Batteux, the single principle that governs both the production of fine a rt – g enius – a nd its critical evaluation – t aste. When he considers the application of this prin-ciple to painting later in the work, Batteux says that he has little to add to what he has already said about poetry. Painting and poetry are, he claims, “ so similar that in order to have discussed both of them at once, we need only change the names and put painting, designing, and coloring in the places of poetry, story, and versification” ( Batteux 2015: 125). The two arts are created by the same genius and judged by the same taste, so Batteux thinks it is obvious that if he has successfully demonstrated that the principle of the imitation of belle nature applies to poetry, then it must also apply to painting. Sculpture is given even less attention than painting in The Fine Arts. Early in the work, in a passage meant to demonstrate that the fine arts are meant “ to capture the properties of nature and represent them in an artifact,” Batteux says “ the chisel of the sculptor depicts a hero in a block of marble” ( Batteux 2015: 6). A few pages later, in a discussion of the manner in which arts imitate, Batteux says sculpture imitates belle nature by means of t hree- d imensional figures ( Batteux 2015: 19). He has nothing to say about sculpture in the final section of The Fine Arts, where he tries to verify the prin-ciple of the imitation of belle nature by applying it to the arts of poetry, painting, music, and dance, suggesting that Batteux’s system is neither as complete nor as comprehensive as it is reputed to be.
Despite his neglect of the plastic arts in The Fine Arts, Batteux was a major influence on the Encyclopedia, or Systematic Dictionary of the Sciences ( 1751– 1772), edited by Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d’Alembert.4 This is evident, first, in the way poetry, music, painting, sculpture, and archi-tecture are grouped together in the “ Map of the System of Human Knowledge” that d’Alembert includes in his Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot ( 1751). This map, which purports to classify all human knowledge, is divided, first, by the mental faculties of memory, reason, and imagination, to which correspond the sciences of history, philosophy, and poetry, respectively. Poetry is, generally, a work of fiction, something made rather than found, so d’Alembert feels comfortable grouping the arts together under this heading. He even says
It is no less true to say of a painter that he is a poet, than to say of a poet that he is a painter, and of a sculptor or an engraver that he is a painter in relief or in depth, than of a musician that he is a painter through his sounds.
( d’Alembert 1995: 156)
Early Modern European Philosophy of Painting and Sculpture
117
The only significant differences between poets, painters, sculptors, engravers, and musicians concern
the mediums they employ. According to d’Alembert, “ the poet, the musician, the painter, the
sculptor, the engraver, etc., imitate and counterfeit nature; but one uses discourse the other, colors, the
third, marble, bronze, etc., and the last, the musical instrument or the voice” ( d’Alembert 1995: 157).
The influence of Batteux is also evident in the distinction Diderot draws, in his entry on “ Art,”
between the mechanical arts and the fine arts. Diderot focuses mainly on the mechanical arts, and
even calls on the liberal arts to “ raise their voice in praise of the mechanical arts,” which have been
disparaged and disdained by philosophers’ prejudices against utility; yet he accepts Batteux’s distinction
between those arts that are pursued on the basis of need and those that are cultivated for
the pleasure they provide ( Diderot 2003). The same distinction informs the article on painting by
Louis de Jaucourt and the entry on sculpture by the sculptor Étienne Maurice Falconet. Jaucourt
defines painting as “ an art which, through the use of line and color, depicts on a smooth and even
surface all visible objects,” though he goes on to insist that
Whatever else it may be, painting should be put among the purely agreeable things, since this
art bears no relation whatever to the things called the necessities of life and exists entirely for
the pleasures of the eye and the mind.
( Jaucourt 2003)
Falconet acknowledges that sculpture possesses a “ seemingly less useful” side that serves “ simply
to decorate or embellish,” and counts it among “ the pleasing arts,” but he still insists that “ this
does not prevent it from inclining the soul toward good or evil” ( Falconet 2003). The “ worthiest
goal” of sculpture is, thus, “ from a moral point of view… to perpetuate the memory of famous
men and to provide models of virtue...” ( Falconet 2003). Even if he does quibble about the degree
to which sculpture is to be counted among the “ fine” arts, Falconet’s entry helps to compensate for
the neglect the plastic arts, and sculpture in particular, suffered in Batteux’s treatise.
One more attempt to determine the place of painting and sculpture in a system of the arts
should be mentioned, because it was taken up by later philosophers, particularly the German idealists
and romantics, and remains the subject of much debate today. The division of the arts that
we find in the Critique of the Power of Judgment ( 1790) by Immanuel Kant ( 1 724– 1 804) follows in
the wake of the “ Analytic of the Beautiful” and the “ Analytic of the Sublime” that constitute the
first part of his “ Critique of the Aesthetic Power of Judgment.” When he introduces the concept
of art, Kant argues that it is to be distinguished from nature, science, and handicrafts; that art is
the product of genius, understood as an innate, unteachable predisposition bestowed upon the
artist by nature; and that “ beautiful art” exhibits or expresses aesthetic ideas, which Kant defines
as “ representations of the imagination that occasion much thinking through without it being
possible for any determinate thought, i.e., concept, to be adequate to it, which, consequently,
no language fully attains or can make intelligible” ( Kant 2000: 182– 1 92). An aesthetic idea is, in
other words, something that cannot be adequately described in language or thought determinately
through an intellectual concept. As such, a work of art may approximate the content of the idea
it expresses, but it cannot fully articulate the idea it presents, so it always points to something beyond
itself. Kant then distinguishes three kinds of art according to the way they express aesthetic
ideas and the cognitive faculties to which these different modes of expression correspond. Kant
associates poetry and rhetoric with the art of speech, which expresses aesthetic ideas through the
free play of the imagination and the understanding; music with the art of the play of sensations,
which, as its name suggests, expresses aesthetic ideas through the impressions of the senses; and,
finally, the pictorial arts of sculpture, architecture, and painting, which express aesthetic ideas
through the “ form” of sensible intuition, rather than through concepts ( the art of speech) or the
“ matter” of sensibility ( music) ( Kant 2000: 198– 202). Sculpture is, for Kant, “ the mere expression
J.
Colin McQuillan
118
of aesthetic ideas” in a form that “ could exist in nature,” while painting consists of a “ beautiful depiction of nature” that is ultimately illusory, because the artist arranges natural forms to please the eye, instead of representing them in three dimensions, as the sculptor does ( Kant 2000: 199– 201). The main difference between painting and sculpture is, consequently, the way they arrange forms in t wo- o r three- dimensional space, not the ideas they express. The ideas they express are aesthetic, which are common to all the arts, so it is the form in which these ideas are expressed in painting and sculpture that distinguishes them from poetry and music. This might not seem like a revolutionary insight; yet, in the 20th century, it would become the cornerstone of one of the most influential theories of artistic modernism – the idea that each art becomes modern when it identifies what is unique about its medium, devotes itself to the exploration of that uniqueness, and purifies itself of extraneous elements.5
5 Conclusion
In this chapter, I have discussed a number of contributions to the philosophy of painting and sculpture from the early modern period in European philosophy. I have passed over the most famous early modern philosophers, with the exception of Kant, because they had little to say about the plastic arts. The works I have discussed also differ in important ways from many of the philosophical treatises that were published during the early modern period. Instead of formal philosophical arguments or theories, I have focused on reflections on the origin of painting and sculpture, the comparative evaluations of ancient and modern art, and attempts to classify the arts in poems ( Perrault), essays ( Addison), histories ( Winckelmann), and encyclopedias ( Diderot). The fact that these works do not present formal philosophical arguments does not, however, mean they are devoid of philosophical content. I have tried to show that the accounts of the origin of the painting and sculpture that we find in Addison, Winckelmann, and Herder contain claims about the nature of the arts and the specific differences between them; that evaluative principles of crit-ical judgment are articulated in the debates about the relative merits of ancient and modern paint-ing and sculpture that we find in Perrault, Temple, and Wotton, as well as in debates about more specific features of ancient and modern art that we find in Winckelmann and Lessing; and, finally, that the attempts to distinguish and classify the arts that we find in Batteux, d’Alembert, Diderot, and Kant help to define the relationship of painting and sculpture to one another, to the other arts, and, ultimately, to the rest human knowledge. Whether they traced the origin of works of art back to human nature, religion, or culture; maintained that the principles according to which we judge artworks are universal or particular; asserted that the works of one period are superior to those of another; assimilated the plastic arts to poetry or distinguished pictorial art from the art of speech; insisted that they imitate beautiful nature or express aesthetic ideas, early modern philosophers addressed painting and sculpture with the same rigor and the same revolutionary spirit as they did their contributions to other parts of philosophy. They did not see the philosophical implications of their discussions of painting and sculpture as uniquely “ aesthetic” problems or as problems of “ the philosophy of art,” but that is only because these were not recognized as distinct parts of philosophy for most of the early modern period.
Notes
1 I defend the novelty of aesthetics as a new science and a new part of philosophy, which is to be distin-guished from the critique of taste and the philosophy of art, in McQuillan 2015: 1 01– 133. An alterna-tive view, which holds that all of these discussions are continuous and belong “ to the same subject,” is defended by Paul Guyer in Guyer 2014: 1 – 29.
2 The neglect of painting and sculpture by early modern philosophers should not be mistaken for an in-difference to art in general. Many early modern philosophers, including Hobbes, produced editions and
Early Modern European Philosophy of Painting and Sculpture
119
translations of classical poetry and drama; Descartes’ first publication was about music; and Hume wrote
a number of important essays about ancient and modern literature. See Hobbes 2008; Descartes 1961;
and Hume 1987. See also McQuillan 2015: 18– 22.
3 Paul Oskar Kristeller’s article “ The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in the History of Aesthetics”
( 1 951– 1 952) remains the most common source for discussions of systems of the arts. Kristeller credits
Batteux with taking “ the decisive step toward a system of the fine arts” in Kristeller 1952: 20.
4 In fact, a passage from Batteux’s The Fine Arts was included, without attribution, in the entry on “ Good”
by Claude Yvon in Diderot’s Encyclopedia. See Batteux 2015: xxviii, 47.
5 I refer, of course, to Clement Greenberg’s account of modernism in “ Modernist Painting” ( 1960).
Greenberg traces his account of modernism back to Kant, though not to Kant’s classification of the arts.
Instead, he focuses on Kant’s conception of critique, which Greenberg understands as a kind of immanent
self-criticism.
Works Cited
Addison, Joseph and Steele, Richard. The Spectator. Edited by Henry Morley. London: George Routledge
and Sons, 1891.
Batteux, Charles. The Fine Arts Reduced to a Single Principle. Translated by James O. Young. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2015.
Baumgarten, Alexander. Reflections on Poetry. Edited and Translated by Karl Aschenbrenner and William B.
Holther. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1954.
D’Alembert, Jean le Rond. Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot. Translated by Richard N.
Schwab. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Descartes, René. Compendium of Music. Translated by Walter Robert. Münster: AIM, 1961.
Diderot, Denis. Diderot on Art, Volume I: The Salon of 1765 and Notes on Painting. Translated by John Goodman.
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995a.
Diderot, Denis. Diderot on Art, Volume II: The Salon of 1767. Translated by John Goodman. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1995b.
Diderot, Denis ( ascribed by Jacques Proust). “ Art.” The Encyclopedia of Diderot & d’Alembert Collaborative
Translation Project. Translated by Nelly S. Hoyt and Thomas Cassirer. Ann Arbor: Michigan Publishing,
University of Michigan Library, 2003. Web: http:// hdl.handle.net/ 2027/ spo.did2222.0000.139
Falconet, Étienne-Maurice. “Sculpture.” The Encyclopedia of Diderot & d’Alembert Collaborative Translation
Project. Translated by Nelly S. Hoyt and Thomas Cassirer. Ann Arbor: Michigan Publishing, University
of Michigan Library, 2003. Web: http:// hdl.handle.net/ 2027/ spo.did2222.0000.166
Greenberg, Clement. The Collected Essays and Criticism ( Vol. 4: Modernism with a Vengeance, 1957– 1969).
Edited by John O’Brian. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Guyer, Paul. A History of Modern Aesthetics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Hegel, G.W.F. Hegel’s Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art. Translated by T.M. Knox. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1975.
Herder, Johann Gottfried. Philosophical Writings. Edited and Translated by Michael N. Forster. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002a.
Herder, Johann Gottfried. Sculpture: Some Observations on Shape and Form from Pygmalion’s Creative Dream ( 2nd
Edition). Edited and Translated by Jason Gaiger. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002b.
Hobbes, Thomas. Translations of Homer. Edited by Eric Nelson. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature. Edited by P.H. Nidditch. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978.
Hume, David. Essays: Moral, Political, and Literary ( Revised Edition). Edited by Eugene F. Miller. Indianapolis:
Liberty Fund, 1987.
Jaucourt, Louis, chevalier de. “ Painting.” The Encyclopedia of Diderot & d’Alembert Collaborative Translation
Project. Translated by Nelly S. Hoyt and Thomas Cassirer. Ann Arbor: Michigan Publishing, University
of Michigan Library, 2003. Web: http:// hdl.handle.net/ 2027/ spo.did2222.0000.163
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of the Power of Judgment. Translated by Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Kristeller, Paul Oskar. “ The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in the History of Aesthetics, Part I.” Journal
of the History of Ideas 12, no. 4 ( 1951): 496– 527.
Kristeller, Paul Oskar. “ The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in the History of Aesthetics, Part II.”
Journal of the History of Ideas 13, no. 1 ( 1952): 1 7– 46.
J.
Colin McQuillan
120
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim. “ Laocoön: An Essay on the Limits of Painting and Poetry”. Translated by W.A. Steel. Included in Classic and Romantic German Aesthetics. Edited by J.M. Bernstein. Cambridge: Cam-bridge University Press, 2003.
McQuillan, J. Colin. Early Modern Aesthetics. London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015.
Perrault, Charles. “ The Age of Lewis the Great.” Included in Callieres, Francois de. Characters and Criticisms of Ancient and Modern Orators, Poets, Painters, Musicians, and Other Arts and Sciences. London: Richard Smith, 1714.
Schelling, F.W.J. The Philosophy of Art. Edited and Translated by Douglas W. Stott. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1989.
Temple, William. An Essay upon the Ancient and Modern Learning. Edited by J.E. Spingarn. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1909.
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim. Reflection on the Painting and Sculpture of the Greeks ( 2nd Edition). Translated by Henry Fusseli. London: Millar & Cadell, 1767.
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim. The History of Ancient Art. Translated by G. Henry Lodge. Boston: Osgood & Co., 1873.
Wotton, William. Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning. London: J. Leake, 1694.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-15 121
12AN ART HISTORY MADE FOR AND BY ARTISTS
David Carrier
To substitute a temporal narrative, already presenting a name, for the physical work of art is to give up those features of the thing that were transient and unrepeatable, bound to a moment that is irre-vocably ended; the unique instance is, for the moment at least, sacrificed on the altar of continuity.
Thomas Crow1
Artists make artifacts. And so the task of the art historian is to construct a narrative describing and relating those objects, in a history telling that art’s development and explaining its meaning and significance. One important form of art history writing is the monographic account of an import-ant individual figure. But often we seek, also, larger scale accounts: descriptions of period styles ( the Southern baroque; Impressionism; Abstract Expressionism); accounts of national traditions ( Chinese painting) or trans- national visual cultures ( Islamic art); and, indeed, large scale world histories like E. H. Gombrich’s The Story of Art ( 1950) or Julian Bell’s Mirror of the World: A New History of Art(2010).
The organizing principles of these art history narratives are very diverse. Some are formalist accounts, while others are Marxist social histories or psychoanalytic commentaries. And their political perspectives are equally varied. Some are politically conservative, others liberal or radi-cal; some claim to be apolitical. But what they almost all share is a basic narrative structure: they describe earlier/ later/ latest art in that order. So, for example, almost every life of Jackson Pollock takes us from his early Picassoesque figurative paintings to his great all- over abstractions to end with his late experiments with figuration. Art and Architecture in Italy 1600 to 1750, Rudolf Wit-tkower’s pioneering history of the Italian baroque, starts with Annibale Carracci and Caravaggio, who enter the Roman art world circa 1600; surveys the mature art of Bernini, Borromini and Pietra da Cortona; and concludes with the Baroque architecture in Turin. The Story of Art starts with cave painting and ends in the m id- 20th century with Pollock’s abstractions and Lucian Freud’s figurative works. Mirror of the World begins with a rock painting, 5000– 2 000 BCE, and ends with a recent abstraction by the K orean- b orn Lee U- f an. And my own A World Art His-tory and its Objects, which offers a revisionist critique of E uro- centric art histories, supposes that histories of other visual cultures, in China, India and the Islamic world, as in the West, involve forward-looking narratives.2
Otherwise very varied art writers all construct forward- l ooking narratives. Vasari begins his Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, from Cimabue to Our Times ( 1550) with Cimabue and Giotto and ends with his contemporary Michelangelo. Giovanni Pietro Bellori’s
David
Carrier
122
The Lives of the Modern Painters, Sculptors and Architects ( 1672) adopts a similar structure for an
account of the next century. And Arthur Danto, after telling the story of modernism, takes us
to the later post- h istorical period. Before Andy Warhol’s Brillo Box ( 1964), art was in a time of
development; after that, the history of art no longer had any direction. T. J. Clark’s Farewell to An
Idea. Episodes from a History of Modernism ( 1999), which offers a novel commentary, takes us from
Jacques- L ouis David to Cézanne, Picasso and Pollock; except in the Introduction and the Conclusion,
it moves strictly in historical order. Art since 1900. Modernism. Antimodernism. Postmodernism
by Rosalind Krauss and her fellow historians associated with the journal October offers a radically
revisionist account. Presenting four different, conflicting methods, they refuse to tell the “ story
unified by a single voice,” and they make some novel judgments of taste.3 But they, too, tell the
story in chronological order.
Just as art writers usually present forward- looking narratives, so the same is true of museums,
which offer historically organized hangings. I know of no museum which places its Abstract
Expressionist works in the first gallery; the modernist pictures in the following rooms; and finally,
the old master art in its last rooms.
Exactly the same f orward- l ooking structure is usually found in history writing. We expect that
a political history of France will discuss the upheavals, the Fronde, 1789 and 1848 in that order.
After all, earlier events may influence later ones, but not ever vice versa. It would be strange to
write a history presenting, say, World War Two and then World War One, because in such a narrative,
it would be difficult to describe the obvious ways in which the earlier war heavily influenced
the later one but not, of course, vice versa. With history, as with art history, a f orward- looking
history is taken for g ranted— it’s hard to imagine any alternative. Ferdinand Braudel and his fellow
Annales historians offered radically innovative h istories— so too did Michel Foucault. But their
books, too, present f orward- looking narratives.
This familiar f orward- moving form of art history narratives relies upon, and reconstructs the
pattern of, real causal connections. In Vasari’s story, Cimabue comes before Giotto, and their
successors take the story up to Michelangelo. In Clement Greenberg’s account of modernism,
the old masters come before Manet, who in turn influences Matisse who influences the Abstract
Expressionists. The life of a visual culture is akin to the life of an individual, who is first a child,
then adult and, finally, an old person. Of course that is only an a nalogy— but it is a suggestive one.
When Vladimir Nabokov tells the life of Gogol in reverse order, starting with the novelist’s
death and ending with his birth, we recognize his mischievous creativity.4 Creative writers
have developed such playful revisions of traditional forward- moving narratives. Those accounts
are self- conscious challenges to the norm, which means that to be plausible they always require
some motivation. Just as historians first present the earliest, then the later events; and intellectual
historians typically move from earlier to later to latest scholars; so art history writers present the
earlier, later and then the latest artists. The reason for adapting this way of narrating is so obvious
as to hardly need explanation. What comes earlier has some effect upon what comes l ater— t hat’s
the inevitable order of historical causation. The wars of Philip II of Macedonia influenced his son
Alexander the Great, but not vice versa. And Kant influenced Hegel, who studied him, but not
vice versa. When the cultural historian George Lichtheim entitled one of his books From Marx to
Hegel, that title alone makes it clear that an interesting revisionist analysis is being developed.5 The
recent history of Marxist thought, Lichtheim suggests, involves a retreat from Marx’s own focus
on activism back historically to a return to Hegelian ways of thinking.
My book about art historical narratives, Writing About Visual Art, takes it for granted that
forward- moving accounts are the natural, indeed the inevitable structure for art writing.6 But
now I will amend that account. Here I follow the lead of several recent art historians, who have
questioned this important convention. In Patterns of Intention on the Historical Explanation of Pictures,
An Art History Made for and by Artists
123
Michael Baxandall notes the problems inherent in speaking of influences.7 To say that an artist
is influenced by some earlier work, he argues, is to attribute the power to that art from the past,
imagining it to as it were reach into the present and bring about new art. Thus, for example,
claiming that “ in 1920 Picasso was influenced by Ingres” suggests that it was Ingres, or, at least,
Ingres’ art, which was doing the acting. But of course that activity actually involved Picasso looking
at Ingres, and making art in response. The past cannot act on the p resent— it’s always the case
that someone in the present acts in response to the past. The psychology implicit in this statement
is revealing: “ influence” implies that the present artist merely makes explicit what was implicit
in the past, with Picasso guided by Ingres. That very misleading Hegelian way of thinking treats
Picasso as if he were passive. Saying rather, “ in 1920 Picasso responded to Ingres” gives a more
accurate view, for it acknowledges Picasso’s active response to earlier art. Picasso’s use of Ingres
involves developing the earlier painter’s concerns in unexpected ways, in a fashion, which Ingres
could hardly have imagined. This, then, is why Baxandall’s book is titled “ patterns of intention,”
not “ patterns of influence.”
In his important treatise Cézanne/ Pissarro, Johns/ Rauschenberg. Comparative Studies on Intersubjectivity
in Modern Art, Joachim Pissarro, with reference at one crucial point to Baxandall’s book,
develops a highly distinctive analysis of artistic historiography. As he explains in the Introduction,
Pissarro is interested in artistic collaboration:
What happens when artists work together? More specifically, what is the role of the viewer
of an artist’s work when the viewer happens to be another artist and the two of them work
closely together… What is the status of a work of art that is the result of communal thinking?8
Part V, “ An Art History Made for and by Artists,” gave me the title for this essay.
Pissarro’s book served as the basis for his MoMA exhibition, Pioneering Modern Painting:
Cézanne and Pissarro 1865–1885 (2005).9 Not surprisingly, the p resent- d ay New York art world
was not prepared, mostly, to understand the implications of this very original analysis. In his review,
Peter Schjeldhal, for example, the New Yorker critic complained:
In terms of a viewer’s chief experience, “ Pioneering Modern Painting: Cézanne & Pissarro,
1865– 1885,” at the Museum of Modern Art, is a show about Paul Cézanne: what he did, how
it works, and why it’s classical. Camille Pissarro, a likable man and a delightful artist, important
in any number of contingent ways, is not in the same league as that driven revolutionary.
Not since the similarly titled “ Picasso and Braque: Pioneering Cubism, “ in 1989– 90, has
MoMA, or any other museum that I can think of, produced such a pitiless comparison of stylistically
related painters, one great and one just very good, with results that are instructive—
providing vigorous exercise for the thinking e ye— while sort of painful.10
As an artist friend, the painter Sean Scully, observed to me, this account missed the point entirely.
Preoccupied with a very New York fascination ( or obsession) with artistic rivalry, Schjeldhal fails
to understand the role of collaboration: Cézanne’s greatness, the show claimed, depended in part
upon collaboration with Camille Pissarro in which, working together the two men developed a
novel visual language.
The central concern of Pissarro’s book, as its title indicates, is to explore the ways in which
artistic creativity involves c ollaboration— w hat he calls, with reference to the philosophical arguments
of Kant and Fichte, “ intersubjectivity.” To be deeply original, he argues, it very much
helps to have an intimate intellectual relationship with another person. Here I deal with just this
one portion of Cézanne/Pissarro, Johns/Rauschenberg, the implications of his account for art history
David
Carrier
124
writing. For my present purposes, this account of historiography can be discussed apart, mostly, from evaluation of Pissarro’s more general claims about intersubjectivity. In the present account, then, I note only briefly here the reliance of Pissarro’s argument upon his reading of Kant and Fichte, and his critique of the H egelian- Marxist tradition of art history writing.11
Pissarro writes:
The past, usually seen through the categories of traditional art history, presents a different appearance when we approach it from the perspective of our present. It appears to be less uniform, less simple than we are wont to expect.12
Inspired by Pissarro’s account, let us think of the historiography of art history in two ways.
First: You are a curator or art historian and your task is to organize a presentation of a group of artifacts in a narrative or an exhibition. So you have, let’s say, paintings by Giotto, Raphael, Caravaggio and Poussin; or, perhaps— if you are a modernist— works by Picasso, Pollock and Rauschenberg, and your task is to identify and describe their relationships. It’s natural that you would adopt the usual art historical perspective and present or describe them in historical order of making. Giotto influenced Raphael who influenced Poussin, and Picasso influenced Pollock, who influenced Rauschenberg. This forward- looking narrative is the approach of traditional art history writing and of most large art museums, which have historical organizations. And as I noted, talking about influences supports thinking about history in these f orward- looking terms.
Second: Your aim is to present art in a way which demonstrates how artists have made use of the past. You want to demonstrate what Poussin learned from Caravaggio and Raphael; or, alternatively, what Rauschenberg discovered of use for his purposes in the works of Picasso and Pollock. Then your exhibition or text would present Caravaggio and Raphael to identify Pouss-in’s uses of their art, and Picasso and Pollock, to locate them as sources for Rauschenberg’s visual thinking. This second approach is suggested by Pissarro’s proposal that art writing take the point of view of artists. For an artist, he notes, the past is less a given than a field of art which can inspire creativity here- and- now. How we then understand the past depends, often, upon how recent artists respond to it.
In comparing forward and backward looking histories, there is no disagreement here about the facts. Both forward and backward- looking accounts include the same artists and both may describe the ways that Poussin and Rauschenberg learn from prior art. But the diverse narratives certainly suggest very different ways of understanding the facts. Traditional art history assembles objects, which have already been made. We have a group of artworks and assemble them in a nar-rative or exhibition in a revealing order. The f orward- looking presentation offers the perspective of the curator or a traditional art historian. Pissarro, however, starts from the perspective of the working artist. A painter comes into the art world; surveys art of the past; and uses that experience to create new art. The goal is to explain how that new work makes use of older art, in a b ackward- looking reconstruction of the creative process. Think of this parallel. A person can look at their life in the past and consider what they have done up to the present. Or they can, rather, look to their future, and imagine how, starting from the present, given their talents and situation, they might choose to act. Narratives of the history of art have a similar structure. We can organize information about art, which has been c ompleted— or analyze the way that new works are being made. Looking backwards, it’s natural to seek out law- l ike descriptions of art’s development; by contrast, looking forward historically involves focusing on the artist’s freedom to make use of the past as he or she chooses.
In writing art history from the artist’s viewpoint, Pissarro would have us reconstruct the pro-cess in which an artist looks at the history of art, and chooses how to employ it. The history of art is open, which is to say that no one can predict exactly how a creative personality will make use
An Art History Made for and by Artists
125
of this history. Here we find the a nti- H egelian dimension of his thinking. Look just at the two
near- c ontemporaries discussed by Pissarro: no one could have predicted in the 1950s how Johns
or Rauschenberg would have creatively used their circumstances. Now, of course, we are looking
backward at an unchangeable past when we describe this situation. An innovative contemporary
artist changes how we see earlier works. As Baxandall says: “ we will never see Cézanne undistorted
by what, in Cézanne, painting after Cézanne has made productive in our tradition.”13 Thanks to
cubism, now we see Cézanne’s art differently. In starting with the present and working backward,
we do not change what has happened. The past is past and so of course cannot be changed. But
what is changed is our present h ere- and- now experience of older art. Now we cannot but see
Cézanne’s paintings as proto- cubist pictures. And so our art history should acknowledge as much.
Here there is an important, interesting difference between history proper and art history.
Historical events really are only in the past, and so can only be reconstructed in our books; but
art works exist here and now. Obviously, as I have said, we cannot change the past. Nothing can
change the events or outcome of the French Revolution, which was finished long ago. But thanks
to more recent events we may, however, perhaps better understand the French R evolution— t hat
is: we may interpret it differently. By comparing it to the Russian Revolution, we may that comparison
to gain additional knowledge of the past. For example, Lenin’s and Stalin’s totalitarian
employment of undemocratic terror may help us better comprehend the Thermidorian Reaction
in Paris, 1794. Political revolutions, we may conclude, have a tendency to overreach. When considering
that claim, what we interpret differently are the events of the past. Art history writing
has an essentially different structure because we understand art differently. When we can set a
Cézanne portrait right now next to a cubist Picasso portrait, we may see the older work in new
ways, which were not available before cubism.
What perhaps is paradoxical is Baxandall’s claim that in looking at Cézanne, we cannot undo
our awareness of the effect of cubism. If that is true, how can we know that cubism has had this
effect? After all, we cannot see the Cézanne as it appeared in 1906 in order to compare it to that
picture as we look at it now, after cubism. We cannot, that is, undo our experience of recent art.
To say that Cézanne’s portraits look different implies that we can compare them as they appear
now and looked before cubism. But no such comparison is accessible to us. So far as I can see,
Baxandall never addresses that important question. One answer to this query is that p re- cubist
commentary allows us, to some extent, to retrieve the p re- c ubist experience of Cézanne. These
written accounts allow us to imagine how his paintings used to look. Another answer is that we
know there has been change even if we cannot directly see it. History, I believe, reveals other
partly similar cases. When a political culture changes dramatically, we may find it difficult to
imagine life before that change. It is difficult today, for example, to imagine a society in which
the rightness of slavery was taken for granted by most people. And yet, we certainly recognize
that a dramatic change has taken place even if we cannot unthink our present circumstances. We
cannot, perhaps, really imagine a culture in which slavery was generally accepted; as, less dramatically,
we cannot imagine a visual culture without cubism.14 We may acknowledge that radical
change has taken place without being able to really imagine its effects.
Within the present art historical literature, we can find accounts developing backward- l ooking
narratives, without ( so far as I can tell) offering a systematic perspective on their implications. Let
us consider examples from the writings of Arthur Danto, Kelly Grovier and Daniel Abad.
As I mentioned earlier, Danto’s art historical historiography is basically forward- l ooking. After
surveying the f orward- looking narratives of Gombrich and Clement Greenberg, he introduces
his own variation on their a ccounts— t he claim that now we have moved forward to the end of
history. But in one place in his criticism, he offers an innovative b ackward- looking narrative. In
his 1998 review “ Abstracting Soutine,” after naming Chaim Soutine’s own admired precursors,
Rembrandt, Chardin and Courbet, Danto discusses Willem de Kooning’s admiration for Soutine:
David Carrier
126
What de Kooning might have seen in Soutine was how it was possible to paint like a New York a rtist— with slabs and strokes of thick p aint— and do the figure: to be abstract and ref-erential at once.15
There were at this time, Danto concludes, two modes of painting abstractly: the abstraction with-out recognizable subject like the art of Pollock or Rothko, circa 1950; and de Kooning’s painting of figurative subjects without the traditional “ isomorphism between the image and the subject’s visual form as traditionally sought.” Very often de Kooning was criticized for painting a figura-tive subject, women, after he and the other Abstract Expressionists made their breakthrough into abstraction. How, it was asked, could he return to the past— to an exhausted tradition, which his peers aspired to leave behind? Danto offers an original response to this question. Inspired by Soutine, de Kooning developed a distinctive form of a bstract- like painting of figurative subjects. His art was in fact as innovative as Pollock’s and Rothko’ s— though not, I grant, also always completely abstract. To put this claim in the terms of our b ackward- looking history, de Kooning teaches us to see Soutine’s art differently. Now we can see how he made an original style of paint-ing possible. Here, then, Danto adopts the perspective of an art history made for and by artists. But he never discusses the general implications of this claim.
In his lively compendium 100 Works of Art that will Define Our Age, Kelly Grovier notes that the British portraitist Jenny Saville is indebted to the massive female nudes of Peter Paul Rubens.16 Then he adds: “ influence is not a river that flows in only one direction.” Her nude self- p ortrait Propped ( 1992), he notes, “ induces nascent meaning in another work ( though perhaps unexpect-edly in a predecessor, not successor): the fifteenth- c entury Flemish artist Jan Van Eyck’s The Arnolfini Portrait ( 1434).” She shows in an exaggerated way the perspectival distortions of the Flemish artist: “ In a ricochet of mountain significance, the later work reflects telling back on the earlier one, complicating Van Eyck’s vision.” In this marvelous example of backward- l ooking art history, Grovier argues that Saville changes our experience of The Arnolfini Portrait. And he goes on to give other such examples.
In a recent exhibition catalogue for Sean Scully, an artist who has very s elf- c onsciously written about his art historical interests, in both modernist and old master art, the critic Daniel Abadie describes this situation in way that is most suggestive:
When a painter evokes another artist’s work, most often he is in fact speaking of his own work: the apparent d istance— the other— allows him to analyse, to make assertions, which in fact reveal the deeper springs of his own personal work and to develop, under the chosen subject, what the painter would have deemed to be narcissistic, even indecent, to examine so minutely were it his own work.17
To offer a backward- looking narrative, he suggests, is a way of an artist taking the allowance needed to adopt a critical perspective on his own work.
It’s quite a normal experience, then, and not at all unusual, to find ways in which contemporary art influences our experience of prior work. But this procedure is not usually identified as s uch— in a self- conscious analysis like ours. Nor, so far as I am aware, have fully developed backward- looking art histories been presented. This present account raises many questions, all of the greatest interest. It would be most useful to seek models of this art history; to explore its implications for aesthetic theory; and to discuss its relationship to the traditional practice of art history. And it would be instructive to relate it to my previous publications done in collaboration with, or in response to Pissarro.18 Backward- looking histories are extremely challenging because they require fundamental rethinking of how to do art history. And so they deserve careful extended discus-sion. Here, however, because space is limited, I consider briefly just two themes, which deserve
An Art History Made for and by Artists
127
( and will receive) extensive future development: I discuss a philosophical concern posed by these
narratives, and I consider their relationship to our present preoccupation with contemporary art.
In the examples in Joachim Pissarro’s book, the links made by Cézanne, Camille Pissarro and
also Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg are, I think, convincing. Even when the works cited
looked rather different, we could understand the connections being offered. Once we accept
( Joachim) Pissarro’s analysis, we don’t require that such visual relations be based upon visual similarities.
Similar looking pictures may not be c onnected— and rather different looking pictures
may be. That said, the question that interests me is what happens when an artist, looking backward
claims affinities which we, after due reflection, are unable to accept?
In the 1960s and 1970s, many art critics constructed what I have called genealogies, accounts of
contemporary painting linking it to older art.19 Just as historians of old master art explained how
Signorelli, Rubens and Caravaggio quoted from Michelangelo, so these commentators linked
contemporary works with earlier painting. For example, the q uasi- m inimalist works by the prominent
painter Brice Marden were linked with the paintings of Manet, Cézanne, Ellsworth Kelly,
Frank Stella and Zurbaran. ( And, also, the writings of Brecht and Kafka, the songs of Dylan and
the films of J ean- Luc Godard were associated with Marden’s art.) Because Marden’s pictures could
appear to be relatively simple, it was natural for his champions to argue that, when properly seen,
they truly are visually complex. But this procedure may be problematic. It’s one thing, I think, to
associate related pictures in which some artist quotes his precursors, or makes obvious use of their
accomplishments, and another to make connections between paintings, which look very different.
The connection between Cézanne’s paintings and Picasso’s portraits is visually obvious; but the
relationship between the planes in Cézanne’s landscapes and Marden’s monochrome panels is, by
contrast, surely problematic. To the extent that the function of such commentary is to validate
novel contemporary art, it’s easy to be suspicious. What, a critic might plausibly ask, is the actual
relationship between Marden’s severe abstractions and these figurative works. It’s one thing to
identify the visually obvious ways in which Caravaggio quotes Michelangelo, and quite another
to make these inherently vague comparisons.
The test for the connections proposed in a b ackward- l ooking history is their visual suggestiveness.
It’s not sufficient, in other words, merely that an artist ( or art critic) claims to make work with
a connection to prior art. What’s required is that this connection be visually convincing to other
people. If, to take an extreme example, a monochrome painter claims to be responding to Giotto,
we need some explanation of that claim. Here we find a connection with a familiar philosophical
issue, dealt with by Ludwig Wittgenstein— the problem of private languages. ( I summarize very
briefly much discussed, controversial claims.) When someone describes their sensations, is it possible
for them to be wrong? When you or I identify objects or describe our experiences, we can
validate our responses by making intersubjective comparisons. That some people are color blind,
for example, is revealed by their inability to make the discriminations of the normally sighted.
We can thus demonstrate that color- b lind people fail to see what is there. But when I describe my
inner experience, using what Wittgenstein calls a private language, no one can validate my claims.
And so, if there is no way we can know that I am wrong, then the claim that my judgments are
right makes no sense. Analogously, when in a backward- looking art history makes comparisons
of his works to prior art, we need to be able to validate those claims. What’s required is some
independent sense that the connections identified by the artist are plausible. Here, I believe, the
situation is no different from that involved when judging any statement by an artist or commentator.
If we cannot see that an artist’s ( or critic’s) account is plausible, then we will not accept that
judgment. In the case of Marden, for example, the mere claim that his paintings can be linked
with Cézanne’s does not necessarily establish the truth of that claim.
Vasari believed that Michelangelo was the great living artist; Greenberg that the Abstract
Expressionists were the successors to the modernist tradition of Impressionism and cubism; and
David Carrier
128
Danto that Warhol’s Brillo Box ended the history of art’s development. Because they had legitimate confidence in these judgments about what contemporary art mattered, they could with confi-dence compose forward- l ooking narratives. Today we really cannot, for it seems surely impossible to offer a convincing account of the canon of contemporary art. At present, all judgments about what recent art matters are up for grabs; any account identifying the present successors to the great tradition is sure to be highly controversial. And this means that it is extremely hard to write a forward- looking art history extending into the present. No one can say with confidence identify the legitimate heirs to the old masters and the major modernists. A backward history resolves this problem, for instead of focusing on how the tradition leads up to the present, it instead starts with the very recent art and then looks back at prior, earlier art works. Writing the narrative from the viewpoint of the he re- a nd- n ow thus corresponds with way in which so much attention is devoted to contemporary art. Saying this is not necessarily to assert that contemporary art is more import-ant than art from the recent or— even— the distant past, but it is to adopt a style of art writing which does justice to the seemingly unprecedented situation in which so much attention is given to the display, sale and study of contemporary art.
Here, in conclusion, the story of the origin of this essay may be revealing. Some years ago an editor who generously supported the book that Joachim Pissarro and I wrote together, Wild Art, asked us to pitch other projects. As publisher of Ernst Gombrich’s famously successful The Story of Art, she was interested in a successor to that volume, a book that would carry the history further, toward the immediate present. We offered her a plan for a reverse art history. Instead of telling the story from early art to the present, with a narrative coming early/ later/ latest, we proposed rather to move from the present backward toward the past.20 That book remains to be written, but here I offer its philosophical core, which is a suggestive original historiography. Pissarro, in turn, I should note, gives credit for this way of thinking to his friendship with Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg, and to his study of the art and thinking of Paul Cézanne and Camille Pissarro, who was his great grandfather.
Notes
1 The Intelligence of Art ( Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press, 1999), 1.
2 ( University Park and London, 2008).
3 “ Preface: a reader’s guide,” Hal Foster, Rosalind Krauss, Y ve- Alain Bois and Benjamin H. D. Buchloh, art since 1900. Modernism. Antimodernism. Postmodernism ( New York: Thames & Hudson, 2004), Vol. 1, 13.
4 I discuss this example and others in my Writing About Visual Art ( New York: Allworth Press, 2003), Ch. 1.
5 George Lichtheim, From Marx to Hegel ( New York: Seabury Press, 1974).
6 See my Writing About Visual Art.
7 Baxandall, Patterns of Intention: On the Historical Explanation of Pictures ( New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1985), 85.
8 Cézanne/ Pissarro, Johns/ Rauschenberg. Comparative Studies on Intersubjectivity in Modern Art ( New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 2.
9 Joachim Pissarro, Pioneering Modern Painting. Cézanne & Pissarro 1 865– 1885 ( New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2005).
10https://www.questia.com/magazine/1P3–868789561/two-views-the-art-world.
11 Here see our co- authored publication The Blind Spots of Art History: How Wild Art Came to Be - and Be Ignored ( University Park and London: Penn State University Press, 2017).
12 Cézanne/ Pissarro, Johns/ Rauschenberg. Comparative Studies on Intersubjectivity in Modern Art, 226.
13 Baxandall, Patterns of Intention,61–62.
14 This argument perhaps deserves critical discussion, which might consider Steve McQueen’s movie 12 Years a Slave ( 2013) and other forceful presentations of slave culture.
15 Reprinted in Arthur C. Danto, The Madonna of the Future: Essays in a Pluralistic Art World (Berkeley. Los Angeles. London: University of California Press, 2000), 317.
An
Art History Made for and by Artists
129
130
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-16
13
END OF ART AND THE
PLASTIC ARTS
Stephen Snyder
In common usage, the “ end of art” describes art’s late 20th- century shift away from a representational
format to the less structured and more conceptual format of contemporary art. Explanations
for this change in stylistic preference run from a simple shift in taste or preference to
socio- cultural changes, reflecting the politics, philosophy, or economy of a new historical era.
Independent of the reason, the stylistic transformation that is referred to as the “ end of art” had
significant ramifications for the plastic arts, in terms of morphological transformation and philosophical
understanding.
1 Temporal
End- o f- a rt claims are generally associated with the aesthetic and social upheavals of the s ocalled
c ounter- culture revolution that occurred in North America and Europe in the 1960s
and 1970s. For the most part, assertions that art has ended roughly overlap with the close of the
modern and the opening of the postmodern eras. Nonetheless, no particular date can be placed
on what is referred to as art’s end. Hegel, to whom the topic is often attributed, first mentioned
the possibility of art’s end in his Lectures on Fine Art delivered between 1818 and 1829. The first
deviations from the representational style in western art could be seen in the late 19th- century
works of impressionists, and later, more explicitly in Duchamp’s Fountain ( 1917). There are many
who reject outright the claim that art has ended, simply noting that art production appears in no
way curtailed. Though this is true, a change in the style in which art was made is empirically
undeniable.
2 Art’s End as a Historical Phenomenon
There is no determinate cause for the shift in stylistic representation associated with the e ndof-
art claim. However, there are numerous contributing factors, including the invention of the
camera, which had a direct effect on the painter’s task of portraiture. It is claimed that in 1839,
painter Delaroche, upon seeing a number of early daguerreotype photos, declared that “ painting
is dead.” Beyond portraiture, the camera could depict objects or scenes more realistically, making
the painter’s job redundant. Though the camera appears not to have presented any competition
for the sculptor, the same shift away from optical fidelity occurred in this field. In the late 1900s,
artists in Europe sought to reformulate their style. By expanding their style to include new influences,
they were able to move to a domain where the camera could not go. Gombrich ( 1995)
The End of Art and the Plastic Arts
131
cites the introduction of Japanese water prints, which flooded into the European world, often
as packing material ( 523– 525). The colors and perspectives used in these prints were thought
to have strongly influenced the Impressionists. At the same time, the trend for European artists
was to look for alternatives to the classical models they had used for so long. This in itself signals
that representational art was losing its “ expressive power.” Many painters, Picasso among them,
sought to incorporate forms from outside of the western tradition. Kenneth Clark, in his 1935
essay “ Future of Painting” wrote, “ in the western world the plastic spirit is really exhausted and…
art will be lost for many decades.” At this time, he argued that a “ new myth” was needed that
manifested “ inherently pictorial” symbols ( Hammer). Though he seemed to change his tone with
his embrace of British Modern painters, the trend of the plastic arts moved decisively away from
the classical models of the past.
The standards of the museum also became suspect. Museums housed national treasures that
were acquired through conquest. These national treasures became symbols of imperialism that
were rejected by some in the a vant- garde. The artistic standards of the academy were seen as
gatekeepers used to reject forms of folk art or art of minority groups whose style did not match
those of the dominant class ( Cahan, 2016, 5; Snyder, 2018, 249– 250). Thus, the standards of the
academy, and with them the museums, were decried, despite the ostensive efforts of some of the
same critics to gain access to the museum. One downside for p ost- representational art, according
to critic Robert Morgan ( 1999), was that the notion of quality to which the academy adhered was
discarded along with the bourgeois sensibilities that upheld an ethnocentric standard of taste ( 12).
Art critic Donald Kuspit ( 2004) argues that the end of art arrives when modern art is replaced
by “ postart.” In postart, the signifiers of quality present in a masterpiece are completely lacking,
and the “ autonomous” power of art, which the a vant- garde evoked by showing the audience the
“ unwitting” puppet strings of the unconscious, is leveled into the everyday ( 1 75– 1 77). If everything
becomes culture, the differentiation between culture and art is erased, stripping art of its
transformative power ( 10– 11). The modernist inclination to rebel against the aesthetic, perhaps
initiated by the Dadaists, succeeded in ending art, but not on its own terms. The freeing transformation
that abstract art strove for in turning its back on the everyday was “ assimilated by the
materialistic mass society it repudiated” ( 1 72– 1 73). Though art became accessible to a far larger
audience, for Kuspit, the cost of wresting art from the elites was that when severed from its power
to access the sublime, art was also lost to the masses. Having lost a clear concept of meaning, art
could no longer assist as a critique of culture ( 8, 13).
The trend of art’s progression toward the perfection of the representational format— artistic
creations that adhered optically to the objects they r epresented— t o an alternative format of depiction
that might be better described as conceptual is documented by numerous art historians.
Ernst Gombrich analyzes this trend, applying his theory of “ making and matching” to the history
of artistic imagery. Gombrich’s theoretical take on the history of pictorial i mage- m aking explains
the development of representational art as a progression of t rial- and- error attempts to perfect the
mimetic image. Gombrich showed how, over the course of centuries, artists learned to trick the
eye, creating “ schemata” that could be passed on to generations of future artists, forming a practice
that mastered the craft of making illusionistic images. Though Gombrich ( 2000) made no explicit
end- o f- a rt claim, he recognized that with the rejection of their schematic tradition, the modern
artists’ move away from representational depiction pointed to the end of a historical narrative.
Arthur Danto ( 1995, 198; 1983) argued that Gombrich’s inability to recognize Duchamp’s readymades
was a clear falsification of his theory defining art as a trial- and- error process of mimetic
depiction. Though Gombrich seemed to falter when applying his m aking- a nd- m atching model
to contemporary art, his theory can be employed to explain the art of “ our time” if we are willing
to use Gombrich to look beyond Gombrich. Gombrich’s theory of art was widely interpreted as
pertaining only to pictorial representation, and though most of his major works deal with mimetic
Stephen Snyder
132
art, nowhere in his work does he commit to the notion that all art is representative ( Horowitz,
1998, 318).
Crucial to Gombrich’s ( 2000) account of art is the recognition that reciprocal communication
occurs between artist and beholder via the ever changing and evolving set of artistic schemata.
For art to be effective, the beholders must recognize, or at least be cognizant of, hints of meaning
planted in the work. If there is nothing recognizable, then its draw may be lost. One indicator that
art was becoming conceptual, he notes, is that “ The artist gives the beholder increasingly ‘ more to
do’, he draws him into the magic circle of creation and allows him to experience something of the
thrill of ‘ making’ which had once been the privilege of the artist” ( 202). The conditions of artistic
creation and interpretation are linked to what Gombrich refers to as the “ mental set.” This presupposes
that “ the beholders’ identification with the artist must find its counterpart in the artist’s
identification with the beholder” ( 234). Gombrich notes that when a new word is added to a language
it is understood within the context of an already developed language. But language made
up of only new words and new syntax would be unintelligible ( 240). The downside of the vast
array of choices that the artist has today is that the language of art comes close to being unintelligible.
Limits, according to Gombrich, do serve a purpose in achieving communicability because
“ where everything is possible and nothing unexpected, communication must break down” ( 376).
Hans Belting ( 1987), who sees the end- o f- a rt phenomenon as a kind of methodological failure,
notes the “ methodological controversy” that Gombrich faced ( 22– 23). Belting writes that
“ contemporary art indeed manifests an awareness of a history of art but no longer carries it forward.”
This phenomenon is compounded by the problem that art history, as a discipline, “ no longer
disposes of a compelling model of historical treatment” ( 3). Belting does not see art as ending,
but he observes two art histories emerging: the internal sense of history employed in the creation
of art and the art historical method used to describe the current state of the arts. Because art history
cannot coherently trace the notion of history used in the process of artistic creation, the two
accounts diverge. “ Thus to the rupture of art in the modern era corresponds an analogous breach
in a rt- historical scholarship” ( 35). Belting predicts a solution in a new methodology, one that takes
into account the artistic process within its historical context. Nonetheless, he recognizes there are
many processes at play in the creation and interpretation of art, and that no one unidirectional
process will be found ( 94).
3 Philosophy and the End of Art
The e nd- o f- a rt theme, as it is understood in contemporary philosophy, stems from Hegel’s Aesthetics.
The topic, however, can be traced to Plato’s questioning of the place artists should take in
the ideal republic. In Republic, Plato’s primary criticism of the mimetic arts was that they were
copies of copies, diminished versions of the real. Lacking any real connection to the forms, Plato
made that case that any appreciation of the mimetic arts would negatively affect one’s ability to
educate and to convey truth and aggravate the emotions by deceiving the rational capacity. Even
for thinkers who advocate the aesthetic medium, such as Hegel, the form of art they propose employed
Plato’s visual model, which defines the artwork as a degenerate copy of something in the
world. The most favorable philosophical accounts of art still frame its cognitive or developmental
advantages such that it ultimately remains below the “ real” or the philosophical articulation of
truth. Nietzsche may be the exception to this rule, insofar as he held that with all truth claims
beyond the grasp of the human mind, the aesthetic claim might be the most amenable to our w ellbeing.
1 Still, most philosophical e nd- of- art claims turn on an unbridgeable gap that exists between
the artwork as a copy of some perceived reality, ideal or otherwise, and the object it represents.
The e nd- of- art thesis is the merger of the idea that art is a lesser version of the real and Hegel’s
“ end- of- history” claim, which is found in Hegel’s writings on the philosophy of history. Hegel
The
End of Art and the Plastic Arts
133
( 1953) suggests that history will end as a developmental process as the ideal and final form of a cultural
totality is approached ( Snyder, 2018, 63– 65, 1 61– 166). But unlike history, which continues
insofar as time does not halt, the e nd- o f- a rt claim entails art as we know it ceasing to be. Though
highly controversial, historical evidence supports the claim that art as a discipline that progressively
moves toward the goal of creating images that mimic the “ real” is no longer the norm.
Contemporary philosophers, most notably Danto, have pursued this Hegelian theme in some
form, examining 2 0th- century western art’s transformation, painting, and sculpture in particular,
into disciplines that for better or for worse seem to have jettisoned the conventions of the past.
4 Hegel’s Aesthetics
Hegel’s ( 1975) wide- reaching philosophy postulates a unified dialectical process driving the concept’s
actualization in nature through the “ idea.” The idea is the unity of real existence and the
concept that manifests itself in time through subjective ( individual minds separate from their social
contexts), objective ( institutions of state and civil society), and absolute spirit. The focus of his
aesthetic philosophy is absolute spirit, articulated in art, religion, and philosophy. It is outside of
finite history per se, but in order to have objectivity, spirit’s message must be subjectively grasped.
The process through which spirit is subjectively grasped is transformative. The absolute confronts
a world “ which must be built up, adequately to the Absolute, into an appearance harmonizing
with the Absolute and penetrated by it” ( 623). Art prepares and transforms actual reality for dispersion
of the absolute. Though absolute spirit is art’s creative driver, in its final form, spirit seeks
expression in a form that is beyond art. When the preparation of the world is complete, art is no
longer required by spirit.
Hegel follows Aristotle ( 1997) who held the poem had cohesion and unity not extant in history
( Chapter Nine, 41). This approach to finding meaning in history through art leads Hegel to privilege
the more highly developed, conceptual forms of matter over those with lower conceptual
content, or, simply put, form over matter. Lamenting the passing of the age of art, Hegel ( 1975)
claims that the time comes in every civilization at which “ art points beyond itself,” ( 103) and
“ thought and reflection … spread their wings above fine art” ( 10). Hegel envisions spirit’s form of
expression moving from the concretely sensual in art to the conceptual in philosophy. Ostensibly,
Hegel’s prognosis reflects the transition from the sensuous to the conceptual, from the eye to the
psyche, which typifies contemporary art.
5 Hegel and the Individual Art Forms
Hegel ( 1975) explains the transition of art from sensual to conceptual through historical stages, the
symbolic, classical, and romantic. The level of articulation the concept finds in the material varies
according to the maturity of the concept, unfolding initially through art’s seeking out and finding
adequate content, eventually transcending its formal incarnation as the idea becomes more determinate
( 967). The first of the five forms of art Hegel recognizes is architecture, the most material
form of art, which he associates with the symbolic stage. The idea is externally manifest in architecture,
the material structured according to mechanical rules that are not internal to the object
( 84, 624). The symbolic p hase— epitomized by the architecture of Eastern antiquity— expresses
sublimity. Architecture is fulfilled through spirit’s transition to the sculpture of the classical stage.
In sculpture, the idea corresponds perfectly to the material; the highest form of the idea in the
classical period is the individual human form manifested by the Greek gods. Hegel considered
artworks of this era to be the incarnation of ideal beauty ( 85, 6 24– 625). The perfect balance of
inner and outer brings art to its highest level of fulfillment. Spirit, however, does not rest in its
most perfect state. The passing of Hellenistic culture effects the transition to the romantic stage.
Stephen Snyder
134
Romantic art infuses the individual god of the classical stage into the community. A higher notion
of unity is brought to the individual’s inner self, r e- articulating spirit through the mediums
of color, sound, and speech in painting, music, and poetry ( 86, 625). Hegel defines the romantic
arts in terms of the progressive expression of spirit in history, each unfolding according to the
dialectical task of transforming the world such that it becomes adequate for the absolute. Each art
has a specific location in the dialectic, manifesting the higher and lower organization of substance
according to its balance of form and matter, concept and real existence.
Painting loses its third dimension in the transition from sculpture, ostensibly offering viewers
less. But color is used to represent three dimensions in two.2 The sculptural image is s elf- s ufficient;
the spiritual and the sensuous coexist in material form. Transformed into pure appearance, the
materially sensuous experience is cancelled in painting. Nonetheless, painting does not lose its
dimensionality; it is articulated in the higher conceptual realm of mind.
Passing beyond the spatial form, music moves further toward the pure expression of spirit,
manifesting itself in the inner self. Seeking more concrete expression beyond the inner self, the
dialectical movement brings art to the highest phase in the final form of poetry. Although poetry
cannot attain the descriptive definiteness that painting achieves through sense perception, poetry
is not restricted to one moment. Unlike painting, poetry generates an image for the imagination
through a succession of portrayals drawn together into a single unity spanning time. Despite poetry
being the highest form of spirit’s expression, it is lacking as a balanced art form and cannot
attain the harmonious equilibrium of sculpture. Thus, spirit moves on, seeking articulation in the
higher, less material, forms of religion and philosophy, and in Hegel’s eyes, art ends as the highest
form of spirit’s expression.
6 Hegel and the Plastic Arts
The dialectical process compelling art’s end predicates the manner of spirit’s articulation in sculpture
and painting. Architecture and sculpture are defined by their three- d imensional physicality.
In the case of classical sculpture, the balance is perfect, but the external imbalance of s ymbolicphase
architecture causes it to be more sculptural, often representing forces of nature, taking
the form of an animal, plant, or god. The great pyramids and the Sphinx were architectural and
sculptural. Despite being presented in human form, in c lassical- p hase sculpture, the Greek gods
are not anthropomorphized, showing neither human emotions nor frailty.3 The emotion, the
anxiety, the pain of humanity is embodied through the inward trend of romantic art. While the
Greek goddesses rarely display maternal attributes, it is epitomized by the mother and child bond
embodied in the Madonna and child motif ( Snyder, 2018, 45– 49).
Hegel ( 1975) theorized that the inward dialectical trend of romantic art relinquishes outer form
to the harsher elements of materiality. The representation of external form, when decoupled from
its inward spirituality, tends toward the shocking. The ideally balanced combination of universal
and particular found in sculpture is presented as a unified whole. Because the particular elements
of the dialectic are presented separately in painting, it branches into two extremes, represented by
depth of topic and the skill of the artist ( 863). At this phase, painting passes its peak, and ugliness
becomes more prevalent. In paintings typified by depth of content, the subject matter is religious,
and ugliness is embodied in the suffering of martyrs and the evil of sinners ( 864, 883).4 The other
camp, which exemplified the artist’s skill, took the everyday as its subject matter. Typical of the
works of the Dutch masters, these paintings naively portray life of the common people as merry
and enchanting, counteracting elements of the bad with the comical, illuminating the universal
human spirit in the commonplace.5 In his time, Hegel witnessed the comical and cheery presentations
of the Dutch masters give way to the merely vulgar: “ in modern (heutigen) pictures, a
painter tries to be piquant in the same way, what he usually presents to us is something inherently
The
End of Art and the Plastic Arts
135
vulgar, bad and evil without any reconciling comicality” ( 887). Recognizing vulgar reality as the
dominant theme of painting in his day, for Hegel, painting ceased to be a vehicle of spirit’s higher
message.
7 Philosophy and the Death of Painting
Clement Greenberg, one of modernism’s foremost art critics, chronicled, and perhaps influenced,
the succession of modern art from abstract to flat to the essential monochrome. The progress of
modern art, by some accounts, followed the Hegelian prolepsis to a T.6 Greenberg’s narrative
explanation for the development of Jackson Pollock’s style could hardly have been more Hegelian.
Pollock echoed the voices of his day, claiming the death of easel painting was imminent. He
asserted that an unconscious force was driving modern art to a new form of expression: “ It seems
to me that the modern painter cannot express this age, the airplane, the atom bomb, the radio, in
the old forms of the Renaissance or of any other past culture. Each age finds its own technique”
(1999, 20).
Greenberg ( 1988) saw the leveling of hierarchical distinctions at the core of this new technique.
Having done away with beginning, middle, and end, this “ decentralized” art had become monotonously
uniform as painting dissolved into “ sheer sensation” ( 222– 224). Painting’s “ polyphonic”
transformation— a term Kurt List and Rene Leibowitz used to describe Schoenberg’s 12- t one
compositions— infected “ the notion of the genre with a fatal ambiguity” ( 223). Greenberg also
saw this polyphonic trend in literature. Seeing a sea change in how art was being made, he concluded,
“ the future of the easel picture as a vehicle of ambitious art has become problematical.”
Artists such as Pollock were “ destroying” this convention ( 225).
In Greenberg’s eyes, the search for art’s essence stems from Kant. As Kant used reason to purify
thinking, modern artists sought to purify painting ( Danto, 1995, 67). Greenberg ( 1993) called
Kant “ the first real Modernist” because “ he was the first to criticize the means itself of criticism”
( 85). The focus of Enlightenment was the external, so the outer form was the subject of criticism.
Modernity turns the critical sense inward, directing criticism toward procedures that create art
objects. Hence, Greenberg read Kant’s inward criticism, establishing the limits of logic as a move
toward purification. Over the centuries, the individual art forms borrowed heavily from other
styles, adopting stylistic attributes that evolved into other disciplines: entertainment, therapy, etc.
Subsumption under these derivative forms threatened to strip the individual arts of socially redeeming
values unique to them. This drove leading- e dge artists of the modern era to refine and
employ techniques specific to their individual art. When painting shed much of what had been
incorporated from the other arts, what remained was essentially its own. Seeking its own essence,
painting imposed progressively stricter limitations on what it could be; moving from attempts
to recreate three dimensions in two, to the impressionist’s removing shading and modeling to
depict the literal optical experience, and the cubist’s i mage- fl attening abstractions. Finally, s elfdefinition
led to merely compositional or monochrome paintings ( 86– 89).7
8 Danto and the End of Art
Greenberg ( 1993) asserted that “ Art is— among other things— continuity, and unthinkable without
it” ( 93). Despite the dissolution of the conventions of the past, art was still at one with its
history. Yet, Danto ( 1995) notes, in 1992, Greenberg insisted that no significant art had been
made in over 30 years ( 105). For Danto, this demonstrated the end of continuity with the past,
insofar as Greenberg was unable to recognize the significance of Warhol’s pop art. Danto and
Greenberg were in agreement that modern art sought a kind of purification through an attempt at
self- definition. But, as Danto interpreted the progress of art’s history, when art became aware of
Stephen
Snyder
136
its own definition, the narrative of art that had dominated since the 14th century was at an end.
Art was now free to be anything it wanted, free to choose from any style of the past.
For Danto, art’s awareness of its s elf- d efinition indicated the achievement of some form of
self- c onsciousness. Taken literally, this means art has become self- a ware ( Hilmer, 1998, 73). The
process of self- d iscovery, upon which painting, sculpture, and each of the several arts embark,
ends in their understanding of themselves as art. This led to a kind of freedom insofar as the artistic
conversation was no longer driven by the narrative of modernism, signaling, per Danto, the
end of the era of art. For Danto, art’s tectonic shift seemed to come with Andy Warhol’s Brillo
Box, a sculptural work “ identical” to its commercial counterpart. Danto ( 1986) notes a parallel
with Hegel’s notion of absolute knowledge, the point at which knowledge of an object is at one
with the object itself ( 113), but the analogy is deceptive. Despite Danto’s peculiar claim that art
achieves self- consciousness, his approach differs significantly insofar as it is pre- Kantian ( Snyder,
2018, 153–167, 208–213; 2019).
Danto, as Hegel, sees one era of world history transitioning into the next when the era of
art ends and p ost- h istory begins. But for Hegel, there is a dialectical transition through which a
higher level of mind gradually manifests itself in the world, transforming the real into the ideal,
closing the gap between nature and the concept. For Danto, the representation does not transform
the world, it mediates, existing in the gap between the world and language; relations of the world
never collapse into truth ( Snyder, 2018, 151). Danto defines “ world,” as opposed to world, as an
individual’s interior social and historical context. The “ world” we inhabit, in Danto’s terms, is
a network of belief propositions existing in the form of representations: texts, symbols, images,
some machines, or any medium that can embody these propositions ( 1999, 9 0– 92). One’s “ world”
forms one’s belief system and what one believes the world is. Though one is more likely to survive
if one’s “ world” more closely resembles the world, the two diverge widely. This gap is the area of
existence that we occupy, and our “ world” representations bridge it; we are embodied representations,
words made flesh ( x, 80, 93, 144, 222). Referring to “ representational causality,” Danto
( 1989) argues we are moved to action more frequently by our “ world,” than by the physical world
( 271– 273; Snyder, 2018, 179, 190– 191). Art, Danto tells us, is also an embodied representation, and
we as humans share much with art in terms of our philosophical origins. The ramification of this
for art are many, but two main points fall out of this that help to understand Danto’s account of
the end of art. First, “ worlds” change, and when they change, if one does not change with it, one
stays in the old “ world”; the new “ world” passes on. In Danto’s view, this was Greenberg’s fate; the
critic of modernism stayed in the modern “ world” as the posthistorical “ world” moved on. The
art of modernism ended, and the new era of free art opened. The second critical piece is Danto’s
notion of the “ artworld.” The artworld is analogous to our “ world,” but its reference is art. As the
“ world” of modernism changed, so changed the “ world” of art; hence, though art is still made, the
narrative, or conversation, that drove artistic creation shifted. Though there is an analog to Hegel
in Danto’s account of narrative historical development, the teleological end is not the same as what
Hegel envisioned. In fact, outside of art striving to understand itself philosophically, Danto either
did not “ see” or did not think art could make assertions regarding any other teleological aims.
Danto’s ( 1999) construal of humans and artworks as embodied representation ( x) is the key to
understanding how art could be self- c onsciousness. To some degree, “ world” predisposes an individual’s
agency. As Hegel saw Geist predisposing an individual’s possibilities within historical eras,
for Danto, one’s “ world” mitigates one’s connection to the physical world. “ The mind, construed
as embodied—as enfleshed— m ight perhaps stand to the body as a statue does to the bronze that is
its material cause, or as a picture stands to the pigment it gives form to” ( 197). The artist’s “ brush”
imprints the artwork with the same “ world” stamped on the artist ( Snyder, 2018, 182– 1 89).
Through interpretation, artworks are activated, and through the activity of human interpretation
and creation, a conversation among artworks occurs; much like a virus is not really alive before
The
End of Art and the Plastic Arts
137
infecting its hosts, at which point it comes to life, mutates, and passes to the next host. Similarly,
when art becomes self- conscious through interpretation, artistic conversations can shift, branch
off, or end. As Danto sees it, art is free, but freedom in this case may mean being decoupled from
the constraints of the prior conversation because the last conversation is over, the “ world” it refers
to is different, or the representative vocabulary expanded to the point that conversation’s story is
no longer “ tellable” ( Snyder, 2018, 186, 264). In this way, changes to the “ world” representation
that are embodied in humans would carry over to the artworld of sculpture and painting, starting
a whole new way of art- making.
9 Sculpture after the End of Art
Responding to the wide range of artifacts being classified under the rubric of sculpture, Rosalind
Krauss ( 1979) writes
Nothing, it would seem, could possibly give to such a motley of effort the right to lay claim
to whatever one might mean by the category of sculpture. Unless, that is, the category can be
made to become almost infinitely malleable.
(30)
Krauss surmises that the inclination of historicism is to incorporate diverse forms, subsuming
them under one category comprehensible in terms of continuity with the past. But this, she holds,
stretches the category too far. Danto ( 2007) writes in his philosophy of history, that through the
expansion of a “ class- type” an artist can “ class, as works of art, things which do not necessarily
resemble objects already classed as such” ( 226– 227). This allows artists to create novel forms that
are not “ automatically” disqualified from the class of artworks. For Danto, though, art’s freedom
comes from being unmoored from the constraining internal logic of the modern era: that of finding
a self- d efinition through visual and then textual means. Without constraints, art is free, but
freedom in this sense is also unintelligibility, a story no longer tellable ( Snyder, 2018, 158). Krause
sees the same phenomenon but understands the “ postmodern” situation differently. Sculpture is
not a universal category; it is “ historically bounded” with “ its own internal logic, its own set of
rules” ( 37). In the modern context, these rules are not easily altered. The internal logic of sculpture
still applies when expanded to mediums previously outside of the sculptural. Krauss argues,
Within the situation of postmodernism, practice is not defined in relation to a given
medium— s culpture— b ut rather in relation to the logical operations on a set of cultural
terms, for which any m edium— photography, books, lines on walls, mirrors, or sculpture
itself—might be used.
(42)
Rather than posthistorical art being a “ Babel of unconverging artistic conversations” ( Danto,
1995, 148), art is applying an internal logic to aims other than achieving optical fidelity or s elfdefinition.
8 The dimensionality that once defined painting and sculpture, though not irrelevant,
is no longer essential. Sherri Irvin ( 2013), referring to Duchamp’s readymades, questions whether
a work that “ does not have appreciation in three dimensions among its central aims” needs to be
considered sculpture, especially if the aim is to question the boundaries of sculpture and art itself
( 607– 608). For the plastic arts a creative logic still remains, but severance from the narrative of
modernism has caused ostensible chaos insofar as the traditional categories have either collapsed
or are too malleable to be of practical use. Clearly, Danto is correct that all styles are open; the
boundaries of the plastic arts are blurred as they reclaim ancillary features stripped away in the
Stephen
Snyder
138
search for purity. Porous boundaries that grasp all that is new do not require jettisoning an artwork’s
internal logic; it means artworks do not aim to stay within the bounds of any preconceived
category. There are myriad examples of painting or sculpture striving to solve problems imposed
by adhering— or not adhering— to the constraints of placement, material, purpose, or tradition
( Snyder, 2018, 238– 262); leaving hints showing the viewer that the work is not meant to trick
the eye changes the game by abandoning mimetic aims.9 If we accept Danto’s assertion, that we
are the representational embodiment of the gap between our “ world” and the world, and that we
share this feature with art objects, insofar as they also inhabit this gap, we see how the shift from
one era to the next, from one “ world” to the next, is externalized in the artwork. Sculpture leaves
the museum and integrates with film, music, hikers, or even skateboarders with Simparch’s installation
art; it embodies philosophical texts in Thomas Hirschorn’s d uct- tape and foil structures;
it puts the viewers in the reflection of Chicago’s skyline in Anish Kapoor’s Cloud Gate; copies
commercial objects with Warhol’s pop art; and separates the creative act from the artist in the
works of G onzales- T orres. The internal logic of painting and sculpture, if we can still use these
categories, articulates something of our own living representations and the institutions of our
time, in whatever material that seems available for the task. The conversation strives to continue,
albeit in a drastically expanded form.
Notes
1 Derrida also advocated for prioritization of the aesthetic aspects of language, placing the powers of rhetoric
over logic, suggesting that it should be independent of its mooring in the everyday ( see Habermas,
1990; Snyder, 2018, 263–264).
2 Hegel was not aware that the sculpture at the height of the classical era was painted. He was misled by
reading Meyer. See Knox’s note ( 706).
3 An exception would be The Laocoön Group and other works by the Pergamene School.
4 See Michelangelo’s The Last Judgment, 1536– 1541, on the frontal wall of the Sistine Chapel in Rome.
Torment in religious art is exemplified by Grünwald’s The Crucifixion and The Temptation of St. Anthony,
both panels from the Isenheim alterpiece, 1515.
5 The realistic portrayals of events from daily life by the Dutch painters Jan van Eyck and Pieter Breugel
provide good examples of this trend.
6 David Hopkins ( 2000) raises the question as to what influence the early political orientation of Greenberg,
and other artists and art critics who took part in the artist’s union, may have had on the theoretical
content and the progression of art ( 34).
7 Another element shed by painting in its quest for purity was the narrative context. Objects in the frame
no longer needed to be part of any particular story ( Gombrich 2000).
8 Noël Carroll makes a similar argument in “ The End of Art?” ( 1998).
9 The machined stumps left on Antony Gormley’s “ Event Horizon” ( 2010), for example.
Works Cited
Aristotle. (1997) The Poetics of Aristotle. Halliwell, S. ( trans). Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina
Press.
Belting, H. ( 1987) The End of the History of Art? Wood, C. ( trans). Chicago: University of Chicago.
Cahan, S. ( 2016) Mounting Frustration: The Art Museum in the Age of Black Power. Durham: Duke University
Press.
Carroll, N. ( 1998) “ The End of Art?” History and Theory 37(4): 17–29.
Danto, A. ( 1983) “ E. H. Gombrich.” Grand Street 2(2): 120–132.
Danto, A. ( 1986) The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art. New York: Columbia University Press.
Danto, A. ( 1989) Connections to the World. New York: Harper & Row.
Danto, A. ( 1995) After the End of Art: Contemporary Art and the Pale of History. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Danto, A. ( 1999) The Body/ Body Problem. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Danto, A. ( 2007) Narration and Knowledge. New York: Columbia University Press.
The
End of Art and the Plastic Arts
139
Gombrich, E. ( 1995) The Story of Art. London: Phaidon Press.
Gombrich, E. ( 2000) Art and Illusion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Greenberg, C. ( 1988) “ The Crisis of the Easel Picture.” In O’Brian, J ( ed.) Clement Greenberg: The Collected
Essays and Criticism. Arrogant Purpose: 1945–1949. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 221– 225.
Greenberg, C. ( 1993) “M odernist Painting.” In O’Brian, J ( ed.) Clement Greenberg: The Collected Essays and
Criticism. Modernism with a Vengeance: 1957– 1969. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 8 5– 93.
Habermas, J. ( 1990) “ Excursus on Leveling the Genre Distinction between Philosophy and Literature.” In
The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity. Lawrence, F. ( trans.) Cambridge: MIT Press, 185– 210.
Hammer, M. ( 2013) “ Kenneth Clark and the Death of Painting.” Tate Papers 20. https:// www.tate.org.uk/
research/publications/tate-papers/20. Accessed 3.25.2021.
Hegel, G.W.F. ( 1953) Reason in History. Hartman, R. ( trans.) Indianapolis: Bobbs- Merrill.
Hegel, G.W.F. ( 1975) Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art. Knox, T.M. ( trans.) Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hilmer, B. ( 1998) “ Being Hegelian After Danto.” History and Theory 37(4): 71–86.
Hopkins, D. ( 2000) After Modern Art: 1945–2000. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Horowitz, G. ( 1998) “ Gombrich, Ernst Hans Josef.” In Kelly, M. ( ed.) The Encyclopedia of Aesthetics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 315–318.
Irvin, S. ( 2013) “ Sculpture.” In Gaut, B. and Lopes, D. ( eds.) The Routledge Companion to Aesthetics. New
York: Routledge, 606–615.
Krauss, R. ( 1979) “ Sculpture in the Expanded Field.” October 8 (Spring): 30–44.
Kuspit, D. ( 2004) The End of Art. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Morgan, R. ( 1999) The End of the Art World. New York: Allworth Press.
Pollock, J. ( 1999) “ Interview with William Wright.” In Karmel, P. ( ed.) Jackson Pollock: Interviews, Articles,
and Reviews. The Museum of Modern Art: H.N. Abrams.
Snyder, S. ( 2018) End-of-Art Philosophy in Hegel, Nietzsche and Danto. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Snyder, S. ( 2019) “ Artistic Conversations: Artworks and Personhood.” Croatian Journal of Philosophy 19(56):
229–248.
140
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-17
14
THE AVANT- GARDE
Noël Carroll
Introduction. “ Avant- garde” is a label applied to members of a collection of artistic movements and
works, dating from roughly the mid- 19th century onwards, that were committed to innovation,
primarily in terms of challenging the c onventions – of both style and c ontent – o f the presiding
“ mainstream” artworld practices of the day. First and foremost, these challenges were directed at
artistic practices, narrowly construed, but on occasion could be extended to social and cultural
norms of behavior ( e.g., Surrealism) and could even sometimes embrace political agendas ( e.g.,
Soviet Constructivism).
The term “a vant-g arde” is military in origin. It is French for the “a dvance guard” of an army
which scouts out enemy territory and leads the attack. The battle cry of the early avant- g arde
was “e pater le bourgeoise” – o r “ outrage the bourgeoise.” That is, bourgeois taste and the art
that satisfied it was the enemy that the a vant- g arde intended to attack, along with, in many cases,
bourgeois mores.
Examples of a vant- g arde movements include Impressionism, N eo- Impressionism, Symbolism,
the A rt- for- Art’s Sake Persuasion, Fauvism, German Expressionism, Futurism, Cubism
( Analytical and Synthetic), Suprematism, Constructivism, Dadaism, Surrealism, De Stijl, Abstract
Expressionism, Situationism, Color Field Painting, Conceptual Art, Pop Art, Minimalism, Postmodernism,
and Neo-Expressionism.
Although these movements and their accompanying styles of articulation differ radically, they
nevertheless typically share a recurring mode of a ddress – or, perhaps more accurately, a mode of
dual address.
On the one hand, these works are characteristically meant to bewilder the plain viewer who
comes to the a vant- garde artwork equipped with conventional stereotypes of what an artwork is
or is supposed to “ look like.” For example, the viewer who presupposes that art is, by definition,
representational is befuddled by being confronted by an abstract drip painting by Jackson Pollock.
That viewer is intended to be taxed by what he/ she encounters when she confronts it and is, in
consequence, prompted to ask questions like “ what is this?” or “ why is this art?” or maybe is even
so perplexed that enraged, he/ she declares “ This isn’t really art at all!”
Thus are the bourgeoisie outraged.
But, on the other hand, the avant- garde work is also designed to communicate simultaneously
a theme, a thesis, an expressive q uality – o r some other kind of formal invention or c ontent – t o
the prepared viewer who is able in virtue of his/ her grasp of the lay of the artworld ( its history,
theories, debates, and preoccupations) to interpret the work’s deviations from the norm in context
so as to comprehend the meaning, significance, and/ or purpose of the work.
The
Avant-Garde
141
Of course, in some cases – perhaps in the ideal case – these two viewing positions need not be
inevitably opposed. For a viewer may begin by having his/ her expectations subverted, but then
graduate from that state of confusion as he/ she works his/ her way toward an understanding of
the work. So even if the avant- g arde work leaves the mass of casual viewers in disarray, some may
ideally be able to gradually join the visionary company of the cognoscenti.
For a concrete example of the sort of usual communicative address that the a vant- g arde specializes
in, consider the case of Edouard Manet’s Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe (1863), an inaugural work of avantgarde
practice. It is a large painting, depicting an arbor. In the foreground, a threesome is picnicking.
There are two men, both dressed in contemporary garb, one engaged in conversation, the other
seemingly distracted, and also a naked woman; she is gazing out of the painting toward the viewer.
In the background, there is another woman bathing in a pond or a lake. The humans are
framed by trees. The distance between the picnickers and the woman in the pond is difficult to determine
due to the lack of perspective. To this viewer, it reminds him of a movie b ack- projection.
The colors are somewhat brighter than usual for the period.
The general public was incensed by the painting. Many were scandalized by the nudity. Some
complained of its obscurity. What did it mean? In short, the painting succeeded in bewildering
plain viewers and outraging the bourgeoisie.
But informed viewers had the resources to make sense of the painting. First, they could see its
relationship to art history where there were famous examples of ensembles of men dressed in the
company of naked women, such as Titian’s Concert in the Open Air ( 1510). Indeed, given that the
population of nude women, especially in the genre of mythological paintings, was so vast, it was
somewhat astounding that the public was surprised by the appearance of the naked lady in Manet’s
painting. But triggering that kind of somewhat anomalous response was part of the trap Manet
planned for the bourgeois audience.
Moreover, the relation of Manet’s painting to art history afforded the prepared viewer with a
clue to at least part of the meaning of the work. The allusion to art history signaled that Manet’s
painting was part of a conversation – a conversation about the nature and role of art. The way that
Manet’s painting broke with the conventions of that conversation involved placing a traditional
motif in a contemporary setting – juxtaposing the men in modern attire with a nude woman of
the sort one might find in scene of Olympian goddesses. In this way, Manet asserted not only his
commitment to portraying modern life but also claimed that to be a function of art by connecting
it to art history by means of his eccentric reference to established iconography.
As well, like Gustave Courbet’s A Burial at Ornans ( 1 849– 1850), the large scale of Le Déjeuner
sur l’herbe reminded viewers of the proportions of paintings not just in the mythological genre, but
also the history genre, suggesting that an appropriate role of art was something like the history
of contemporary life – that is, the documentation of life in the present. That the woman at the
picnic, staring at us like the subject of Manet’s Olympia ( 1865), may be taken to be a prostitute also
fits nicely with Manet’s ambition to catalogue the cast of his contemporaneous lifeworld.
If this is a persuasive example of the way in which avant- g arde artworks generally address audiences,
further philosophical clarification of the structure of this mode of dueling communications
is in order. In the next section, it will be hypothesized that this structure is a form of implicature.
Avant-garde implicature. The ambition of the a vant- g ardist is nicely suggested by Friedrich
Nietzsche, an author much admired by many of them. In his book The Gay Science, Nietzsche
writes
It is not by any means necessarily an objection to a book when anyone finds it impossible to
understand: perhaps that was part of the author’s i ntention – he did not want his book to be understood
by just anybody. All the nobler spirits and tastes select their audience when they wish
to communicate; and choosing that, one at the same time erects barriers against the ‘ others.’1
Noël
Carroll
142
But how can the a vant- g ardist realize this form of double address? One way of explaining this
involves extrapolating from Paul Grice’s notion of conversational implicature.2
As Grice points out, much communication is achieved not by outright saying but by eliciting
inferences based upon understanding the relevant context in accordance with a p rinciple – t he
co-operative principle – and four maxims.
The c o- o perative principle holds that one should make one’s communication such as is required
to be relevant at the stage of the exchange in which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or
direction of the interchange in which you are engaged.
Briefly, the four maxims are:
First: The Maxim of Q uantity – D o not make your contribution more informative than required.
Second: The Maxim of Q uality – D o not say what you believe to be false.
Third: The Maxim of R elation – Be relevant ( which is arguably a restatement of the c o- operative
principle).
Fourth: The Maxim of Manner – B e perspicuous. Avoid obscurity. Avoid ambiguity. Be brief
( avoid prolixity). Be orderly, etc.
Abiding by the above makes communication work smoothly. However, communication can still
succeed when maxims are violated. For example, my partner and I go to a party. From experience,
my partner knows that when I say “ I’m tired” that is a sign that I want to leave. So, when I say “ I’m
tired” at the faculty reception, my partner infers that I want to go home, even though what I’ve
said is literally false ( I’m really ready to go out dancing) and thus violates the Maxim of Quality.
So, what I’ve actually communicated goes beyond what I’ve straightforwardly said. I’ve communicated
by implicating that I want to leave the party by saying something utterly different and,
in point of fact, false. But my partner is able to infer my intention given the pragmatic context of
our e xchange – p arty- g oing and our history t hereof – a nd the requirement that my utterance be
relevant to the situation in which it occurs ( i.e., in accordance with the co- o perative principle and
the Maxim of Relation).
Grice himself gives a similar example of implicature. In response to a request for a recommendation
for a student applying to graduate school in philosophy, his professor writes that the student
is punctual and has excellent penmanship but adds nothing else. Since the context of this exchange
is a recommendation to graduate school, the professor’s letter is strikingly u ninformative – a violation
of the Maxim of Quantity – s ince neither punctuality nor penmanship has anything to do
with one’s promise as a philosophy student.
Yet, the admissions committee will infer that the professor intends to implicate something that
is relevant to the context ( of an application to graduate school), viz., that the student has no particular
talents when it comes to philosophy. That is, the professor’s omitting the expected information
is taken to be relevant to his implicated assessment of the student’s lack of philosophical talent.
What does this have to do with avant- g arde communication? Notice that most a vant- g arde
artists would appear to stridently violate many of the aforesaid Maxims. Avoiding obscurity or/
and ambiguity are hardly the hallmarks of most classic a vant- g arde works ( e.g., Dada and Surrealism).
Likewise, many a vant- garde works are neither perspicuous nor orderly ( e.g., Robert Morris’
1968 Untitled {Threadwaste}). Some supply a surfeit of information ( e.g., Nancy Holzer’s Truisms
{1977–1979}). Nor is Andy Warhol’s 1964 film Empire brief. Because such works transgress various
of the Maxims, plain viewers are overwhelmed. But prepared viewers, apprised of the pertinent,
pragmatic, and dialogical contexts, are able to mobilize the co- o perative principle and the Maxim
of Relation, to identify the relevant a vant- garde implicatures.3
For example, in the context of rendering social commentary by departing from perfect verisimilitude
( the graphic correlate of being perspicuous) and portraying the plutocrats in his drawings
The
Avant-Garde
143
of Weimar businessmen in a brutishly distorted fashion, Georg Grosz implicates his perception
of the corruption of German society for the viewer attentive to what is relevant to the kind of
exchange – a comment upon the state of the n ation – t hat Grosz has initiated, given the genre he
has chosen.
Likewise, in the pragmatic context of disputes about what counts as a work of art, Marcel
Duchamp’s presentation in 1914 of a bottle- drying rack as a work of art, while puzzling plain
viewers as an utterly obscure gesture, could be interpreted by reflective viewers, informed of the
work’s relevance to the dialogical context, as implicating Duchamp’s conviction that artworks,
properly so called, need not be the handiwork of its creator, despite that being the conventional
stereotype.
Of course, some a vant- garde artworks may not completely demoralize the pedestrian viewer.
Most will laugh or, at least, smile at the humor of Pablo Picasso’s sculpture Bull’s Head (1942) –
assembled with surpassing visual wit from the combination of the handlebars and seat of a bicycle.
But even in this case, it will not be evident to such audiences why this is a work of art, rather than
merely a clever joke. They will not appreciate that, in the context of plumbing that very question
about the nature of art, Picasso is, pertinent to that arena of discourse, addressing the problematic
and implicating that sculpture be best understood as fundamentally an art of construction.
Similarly, at one level, most of its contemporary viewers comprehended Andy Warhol’s Brillo
Box ( 1964), but many were still left wondering why it was an artwork, while the i dentical- l ooking
cartons in the storeroom of the local grocery store were not. For most casual viewers, the answer
to that question was obscure.
In contrast, what the informed viewer brought to the gallery was a sense of the relevance of
Warhol’s move in the ongoing debate about the nature of art. In that discussion, as Arthur Danto
has demonstrated, Warhol closed off one line of speculation – namely, the Modernist notion that
the nature of art could be defined reflexively by artworks. For artworks proceed through the medium
of appearances and whatever made Warhol’s Brillo Box an artwork was indiscernible from an
ordinary Brillo carton and, thus, not a matter of appearances.4
As the Warhol example illustrates, the intended audience of avant- g arde artworks comes
equipped with knowledge of the histories, traditions, debates, theories, discursive atmosphere,
and even gossip that constitute the form of life of the artworld. Rather than wedded to stereotypes
or even prototypes of what counts as art, when the Maxims of artworld communication are
violated, the reflective viewer ponders what those transgressions might implicate as relevant to the
concerns of the ongoing artworld culture, past, present, and future.
The Avant-Gardes. Although we have identified a recurring approach found across characteristic
a vant- garde endeavors, different avant- garde practices employ that approach to different ends.
Broadly speaking, we can divide the a vant- garde into two broad groups, the Autonomists and
the Integrationists. The Autonomists regard a vant- g arde artworks and/ or the experience thereof
as belonging essentially to the domain of art and/ or the aesthetic, a domain separate from other
precincts of society.
One strand of Autonomism is Formalism as represented by Clive Bell in his book Art, which,
among other things, was a spirited defense of Neoimpressionism.5 For Bell, what identified something
as a work of art was its possession of significant form; and what counted as significant form
was its capacity to engender aesthetic emotion. “ Aesthetic emotion,” in turn, was a species of
what is more commonly called “ aesthetic experience,” that is, experience distinct from ordinary
emotions and their associations with religion, morality, politics, commerce, and everyday affairs.
Indeed, echoing Schopenhauer, the essential function of art was to liberate the individual from
mundane concerns by affording a release or escape from the prevailing demands of human life.
Although Bell avoided invoking “ beauty,” because he worried about its suggestion of sexuality,
his idea of aesthetic emotion was clearly a descendant of the concept of beauty, especially as that
Noël
Carroll
144
was linked to “disinterested pleasure” – that is, a kind of pleasure decoupled not only from selfinterest
and personal bias but as well from the interests of practices such as religion, philosophy,
morality, politics, and so forth. Furthermore, Bell’s notion of significant form itself bears a striking
resemblance to Kant’s idea of purposiveness without a purpose – again an affirmation of autonomy
or independence of art from the other realms of human society, each of which is dedicated to
discharging purposes. Whether a vant- garde projects are endorsed on explicit Formalist grounds
( as one might applaud the work of De Stijl) or in the less specific and even more vague language
of beauty ( e.g., as applied to Whistler’s Nocturne in Black and Gold {1875}), such endeavors solicit
commendation on the grounds of asserting their autonomous status with respect to the surrounding
society and its claims.
Perhaps the most influential case of the Autonomous avant- garde in the 20th century is what
David Carrier called “ American- Type Formalism,” and which is more commonly referred to as
just “Modernism.”6 Associated primarily with the critic Clement Greenberg, this avant- g arde
tendency putatively regarded the essential role of modern art as critique – s pecifically as the critique
of the conditions of possibility of, for example, painting. This critique was to be conducted
in the medium of painting by foregrounding its essential features, such as flatness, the shape of the
support, including the edge, the relation of color and line, and so on.7
In terms of the two- dimensionality of painting, Greenbergians traced a historical trajectory
beginning with Manet’s eschewal of perspective, Impressionism’s dissolution of the picture plane,
and Cezanne’s reduction of images to geometrical forms as steps toward Cubism’s further flattening
of the surface of the picture, Fauvism’s foregrounding of color, Pollack’s parsing of the image
into line and color, and finally color field painting as painterly contributions to the isolation of the
essential features of the medium.
That is, by foregrounding central features of the art of painting by means of painting, avantgardists
were, on this account, supposedly able to propose an inventory of the properties that made
painting painting, and they were congratulated lavishly for doing so. Abstraction, perhaps needless
to say, held a special pride of place in Modernism’s historical itinerary insofar as it regularly made
the surface of the painting unavoidably visible.
The Modernist movement belongs to the Autonomous wing of the avant- garde not primarily
because it affords experiences distinct from those characteristic of other realms of culture, but
rather because it is so avowedly cognitively centripetal or inward looking, concerned with little
more than the discovery of the quintessence of its medium. As discussed earlier, the Modernist
project was stopped in its tracks by works such as Warhol’s Brillo Box and his Campbell’s Soup Cans
( 1962) which, by raising the issue of indiscernibility, canceled the prospects for art’s being defined
by means of appearances via strategies like visually emphasizing features such as flatness.
Throughout the history of the a vant- garde, in contrast to the Autonomous wing, an alternative
aspiration resurfaced persistently. We can call it Integrationism. As the label indicates, it is committed
to integrating art – a vant- g arde a rt – w ith other social practices. Indeed, one of the very
reasons this family of movements can lay claim to being avant- garde is its resolve to reunite art and
other elements of society in the face of longstanding Autonomist dogma.
Integrationists are determined to challenge the boundary between art and life. Whereas the
Autonomist maintains that distinction is absolute, the Integrationist aspires to dismantle it. In
this regard, there are at least two different forms of Integratioinism. One version, in a manner of
speaking, launches its attack on the boundary between art and life from the direction of life in
order to level the distinction. Call these a vant- gardists Levelers.
Duchamp’s readymades and the tradition that it inaugurated is a seminal development for Integrationism.
As a result, the informed a rt- goer will scarcely be surprised upon walking into a gallery
to find an array of tchotchkes boldly displayed. Likewise, Robert Rauschenberg’s Automobile
The
Avant-Garde
145
Tire Print (1953), Jasper Johns’ Painted Bronze ( 1960), Robert Morris’ 1968 Untitled (Dirt), and
Martha Rosler’s Meta-Monumental Garage Sale ( 2012) thrust everyday objects into the spotlight to
be interpreted and appreciated qua art. Likewise in the paragallery artworlds of dance and performance,
commonplace activities like eating a sandwich were transfigured into artworks by Judson
Dance Theater and Fluxus, respectively.
Whereas the Levelers introduce life into the artworld, other Integrationists aim to bring art
into the e veryday – t hat is, to extend the reach of art into daily life by modifying ordinary objects
and processes so that they transcend the boundary between art and life in a way that transforms
certain quotidian types of objects and processes into artworks. Call these a vant- g ardists Transformers.
Two particularly w ell- k nown examples of this tendency were Soviet Constructivism and the
Bauhaus. Whereas the Levelers aspired to import the everyday into the artworld, the Transformers
intended to turn the lifeworld into an artworld.
For instance, echoing Marx, the Soviet Constructivists argued that whereas in the past artists
had merely depicted the world, their brief was to change it. In order to carry out this program,
they rejected the distinction between applied and pure art. They not only made movies and posters
in the service of the Soviet State’s efforts to transform Russian society. The Constructivists
brought to bear their artistry upon many aspects of everyday life including interior decoration,
clothes, worker’s meeting halls, sidewalk kiosks, and even dishes. Perhaps unsurprisingly, their
very avant- gardism engendered resistance from those whose allegiance to pre- existing art stereotypes
led them to suspect the Constructivists project.
Avant- garde Transformers have not only attempted to reconstruct the social world. Some
avant- garde Transformers have also intended to change consciousness. Here, one example that
comes to mind is Surrealism. Surrealism, among other things, aimed at changing people’s attitude
to the world – at encouraging us to experience the world in our everyday lives surrealistically, that
is, as saturated with unconscious desire, and swathed in affect ( especially, in terms of curiosity
and ecstasy): in short, to acknowledging the dimension of subjectivity in human existence purportedly
occluded by “ enlightened” reason. Surrealism, in this respect, was predicated upon the
recuperation of the sense of the marvelous in everyday life once possessed in childhood, a state the
Surrealists privileged as did the Romantics of yesteryear.
Because of their commitments to engaging with life outside of the district of the artworld, the
Transformative a vant- g arde, as represented by movements of Constructivism and Surrealism, was
exiled beyond the pale of history by Modernists. However, with the demise of Modernism, room
for the emergence of the Transformative a vant- g arde is ripe once again – t hat is, if the very notion
of an a vant- garde is still plausible.
Whither the Avant-Garde? A cursory look at leading art journals or a quick visit to a biennale almost
anywhere almost immediately will confirm that what we call avant- gardism is nowadays the
dominant art approach in the upper echelons of the artworld. This raises the question of whether
there are any genuine art- goers anywhere left to be bewildered by the s o- called a vant- garde.
Is it that we should suppose the targets of the avant- g arde are the stereotypes of mass art and
the consumers thereof? But, by this late date, mass art and the a vant- garde seem to have made
peace with each other.
Undoubtedly, some viewers are still puzzled by contemporary artworks. Yet at the same time,
reflective viewers, of whom there are more and more every day, know how to go about negotiating
their perplexity; they know how to use their apprehension of what deviates from their
expectations to track what the artwork implicates. They are in no way as at sea as were the plain
viewers of the historical avant- garde. They know the drill, so to speak. Most, save school children
dragooned for a day trip to the museum, know what they are in for when they pass their way
through the doors of a museum of contemporary art.
Noël
Carroll
146
So, in what, if any sense, is there still an a vant- garde?
Originally, the label “ a vant- g arde” suggested something in advance of the rest of the army.
But how with respect to high art ( museum art, gallery art) can we make a distinction between
the what’s in the lead and the rest? So, does it make sense to call the entire army “ avant- garde?”
Maybe not.
However, even if the label “ a vant- g arde” has lost its traditional descriptive content, the label
still applies rigidly to an enduring approach and its history – one that generally involves problematizing
communicative maxims as a means of implicating its messages, be they thematic or formal,
pragmatic, purposeful, or programmatic.
Notes
1 Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, translated by Walter Kaufman ( New York: Vintage, 1974), p. 381.
2 See Paul Grice, “ Logic and Conversation,” and “ Further Notes on Logic and Conversation” in his Studies
in the Way of Words (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989), pp. 22–40 and pp. 41–57.
3 See Noël Carroll, “ The A vant- G arde and Creativity: A Gricean Account,” The Journal of Aesthetic Education,
Volume 55, Number 1 ( Spring, 2021), p p. 1 – 12.
4 Arthur Danto, After the End of Art: Contemporary Art and the Pale of History ( Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1998).
5 Clive Bell, Art ( London: Chatto & Windus, 1914).
6 David Carrier, “ Greenberg, Fried and Philosophy: American- Type Formalism” in Aesthetics: A Critical
Anthology, edited by George Dickie and Richard J. Sclafani ( New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1977),
pp. 461–468.
7 Clement Greenberg, Art and Culture ( Boston: Beacon Press, 1961).
PART
IIIQuestions of Form, Style, and Address

DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-19 149
15STYLE
Frank Boardman
Style in art has everything you could want in an object of philosophical inquiry. It is both easy to recognize and difficult to understand. It is central to many practices ( historical, creative, cura-torial, critical and otherwise), yet it is not clear that we’re operating with the same concept in all of these contexts. And the various questions concerning style are interrelated enough to warrant joint attention, but distinct enough that answers to one do not always entail answers to the others.
Discussions about style also face some headwinds. The price of engaging with a subject that admits of so many potential positions is having to navigate a congested landscape of actual posi-tions. Worse than that, though, is the difficulty of providing even a minimal t heory- neutral char-acterization of “ style.” In other challenging segments of philosophical aesthetics such as attempts to define “ art” or characterize individual art forms, we have a relatively stable set of base cases with which to operate, even if disagreements over borderline cases prove intractable. At least we enjoy widespread agreement that there are artworks and paintings, and that distinguishing these things from other kinds of things serve worthwhile practical or theoretical ends. The same cannot be said of style.
Without anything like consensus on the most fundamental issues, our first task will be to make explicit some of the criteria we should use to evaluate theories of style. We’ll then consider five central questions along with some available answers to them. I’ll then articulate what I’ll ( only somewhat self- servingly) call a “ simple theory” of style.
1 What Do We Want from a Theory of Style?
The usual criteria for theory selection – explanatory power, consistency, simplicity, utility etc. – all have a role in evaluating theories of style. It will be worth taking a moment to consider the present application of a few of these.
One thing we want from an account of ( just about) any concept is that it captures all and only those things that in fact fall under the concept. Let’s call this the “ extensional adequacy” of a the-ory. An extensionally adequate characterization of chairs (“ furniture designed for one person to sit upon” maybe?) would be true of all and only chairs. The primary reason that “ style” presents more difficulties than “ chair” in this regard is that it just isn’t as clear where we should look for the extension of “ style.” However, we are not without resources. Our data should come from those practices where style is most important: artistic creation, curation and criticism. That is to say, we ought to begin by asking which ( if any) properties of artworks artists, curators and critics treat as stylistic.
Frank Boardman
150
Intensional ( or “ modal”) adequacy is a little more difficult. Typically we want to capture some
concept not only as it is, but also as it might be, could be or would be under different historical
circumstances. We want to articulate its essence, independent of what is accidentally or contingently
true of it. Style, however, is determined by actual histories much more than other concepts.
As such, we should want an account of style that allows for a maximum range of possibilities.
Therefore, we should prefer theories of style on which any property of an artwork could be, and
no property must be stylistic, and individual styles could be ( in some appropriately limited way)
different than they are.
We should also prefer the simpler theory of style over the more complex, privileging the one
that forces us to take on fewer new beliefs. Practically, this means that – all else being equal – we
should choose the theory that requires fewer new terms, senses and entities. As Elizabeth Anscombe
usefully observed, positing a new sense is sometimes our recourse when we are simply
unclear about a concept ( Anscombe, 1963; 1). But at the same time, we shouldn’t read that admonition
as a prescription for equivocation when more than one sense is genuinely in play. This
tension will need to be worked out from within theories of style. For instance, Richard Wollheim’s
distinction between general and individual style ( Wollheim, 1987; 1 83– 1 84), crucial to his
own account, may dissolve on others’. Still other theorists of style may not think this distinction
fine- g rained enough, and insist on a theory of the styles of works, oeuvres and artists instead of
a broader theory of individual style, or separate theories of style in eras, schools and movements
instead of general style.
Finally, we want to be able to do things with a theory of style. We should prefer the theory of
style that not only captures our past and present artistic creation, curation and criticism but also
aids the development of these practices. Important as this sort of utility is, it can be overemphasized
as a criterion. James Ackerman, for instance, thought that “ It is meaningless to ask, as we
usually do, ‘ what is style?’; the relevant question is rather ‘ what definition of style provides the
most useful structure for the history of art?’” ( Ackerman, 1962; 228). While I am largely sympathetic
with the account of style at which Ackerman arrives, insisting on this sort of utility from
the beginning above all other considerations presupposes that the most useful art history and the
most accurate art history are the same, and they may not be. When we severely discount other
criteria – especially extensional adequacy – w e run the risk of imposing rather than discovering
historical narratives.
2 Five Questions
If the preceding discussion provides u s – albeit in a somewhat suggestive manner – w ith some
desiderata for a theory of style, we still have yet to say what form such theories ought to take. Various
accounts will have different emphases and priorities, and some may exclude or even preclude
certain questions altogether. Even so, we can think of answering five central questions as a kind
of minimal requirement for complete theories of style.
2.1 Are Styles Genuine Properties?
The first thing to notice about style in art is that it involves an ascription of some property or set
of properties to something. When I say “ Caravaggio was a baroque painter,” “ The Calling of St.
Matthew is a baroque painting” or “ The seventeenth century saw a flowering of baroque painting
in Italy and Germany” I’m saying something about, respectively, Caravaggio, The Calling of St.
Matthew, and the 17th century.
However, not every such claim points to a genuine property. The moral skeptic, for instance,
thinks that predicates like “ is wrong” or “ is ethical” don’t correspond to anything that is actually
Style
151
in an action or rule. And the skeptic about romantic love similarly thinks that there is nothing
distinct between lovers and beloveds. Could we be similarly skeptical about styles in art? Such
an account would win on our simplicity criterion. The questions of style that require complex
answers don’t arise if there’s no such thing as style to begin with.
The problem with such skepticism is that it doesn’t explain our everyday practices. It is, in fact,
inconsistent with them. The moral skeptic owes us an explanation for the significance we place on
alleged moral values – typically that we are romanticizing or weaponizing our personal interests.
And the romantic skeptic must account not only for our reports of being in love but also for the
ubiquity and recognizability of love s tories – perhaps by suggesting our conflation of love and lust.
Similarly, the skeptic about style must provide a diagnosis for the massive error we seem to be in
with our approaches to art history and criticism, where style ascriptions play a central role. Then
we also need some alternative and preferable way of engaging in these practices. In the absence of
either of these, we can ( at least provisionally) set skepticism aside.
2.2 Are Styles Simple or Complex Properties?
Philosophers have long ( but not uncontroversially) made a distinction between complex properties,
which are reducible to or definable via more fundamental properties, and simple properties,
which are not. Our next question is whether a style ascription like “ is baroque” is pointing to a
simple or a complex property.
Let’s call the position that style is simple in this way “ primitivism” about style. Such a view
would preserve the simplicity of skepticism while allowing much of our common discourse about
styles to go forward. We could, for instance, continue to use style predicates even if we’ll never
provide necessary and sufficient conditions for their applications. However, we do lose out on a
couple key criteria on such a theory. The first is intensional adequacy. We might be able to make
sense of claims like “ Caravaggio might not have painted in a baroque style” which keep facts about
the style fixed and posit counterfactual conditions of the artist. But we can’t make any sense of
claims like “ Without the influence of Caravaggio, baroque style would have been somewhat less
naturalistic than it turned out to be.” If style is primitive, it could not have properties that it does
not – a s it does not really have properties at all. Second, such an account would be sorely lacking
in utility. We could apply style predicates but do very little to characterize styles themselves. And
without the latter, our prospects of adjudicating between competing style predications would be
pretty bleak.
2.3 What Are Styles Properties Of?
The brief treatments above are not adequate to preclude all versions of skepticism or primitivism
about style. But they are enough, I hope, to warrant our turning to some theories of style that
we’re more likely to hold. The primary fault line among theorists of style concerns the kinds of
properties that determine style. Let’s focus for the moment on individual s tyle – t hat of Caravaggio
and The Calling of St. Matthew – rather than the Italian Baroque. On what Wollheim calls
“ generative” t heories – f or instance, his own and Jonathan Gilmore’ s – s tyle properties are ultimately
psychological facts about artists ( Wollheim, 1987/ 1995; Gilmore, 2000). On “ materialist”
or “ taxonomic” accounts, style properties are to be found in or determined by the artwork. Ackerman
and Nelson Goodman, for instance, hold views of this kind ( Ackerman, 1962; Goodman,
1978).
We should briefly mention and set aside another sort of answer to this question. We might
think that rather than the artist or the art object, stylistic properties are ultimately features of
our reception of artworks. Receptive views have pretty severe problems to overcome regarding
Frank Boardman
152
extensional adequacy and utility. If style is a function of reception and our responses to paintings can be as varied as our psychologies, then there is no fact of the matter about a painting’s style. And if that is the case, then there is something deeply mistaken about so many of our standard artworld practices. There may indeed be, but until we’ve exhausted our theoretical resources, it is better to try and explain than to try and explain away our typical behavior. If for no other reason, such a move would forestall all sorts of conversations many of us find valuable.
The practical difference between generative and materialist theories of style is an inversion of object and evidence. Both are able to make sense of the claim that The Calling of St. Matthewis – to borrow Heinrich Wölfflin’s famous distinction ( Wölfflin, 1950) – more painterly than linear, without being a classical case of either. On the generative account, we are saying something about Caravaggio and his creation of the painting, using the painting itself as evidence for that claim. On a materialist account, the stylistic facts attach to the painting, though we may look beyond it to facts of its creation for evidence for a particular style ascription. So the same creative, critical and art- historical ( at least concerning individual style) judgments can be vindicated on either view. Extensional adequacy, then, will not help us adjudicate between the two.
Neither, ultimately, will intensional adequacy. Gilmore is more specific than Wollheim in characterizing the kinds of psychological facts that can determine styles. For Gilmore, the relevant intentions involve an artist’s “ brief,” the “ specific way a group of painters represents the purpose of their activity as painters and the means to realize that purpose” ( Gilmore, 2000; 77). Now, given infinite variety in possible briefs, any psychological fact about artists in and around their creative activity could count as stylistic, and no psychological fact must count as stylistic. Similarly, it is open to the materialist to allow that any feature of a painting could be but no feature of a painting must be stylistic. Had the next generation of painters further north not embraced painterly style, we may correctly see Caravaggio’s work quite differently ( more on this issue in a moment).
Utility may be more helpful to us in adjudicating between these two kinds of theories, though their advocates will likely disagree about what this criterion demands. In brief, the generative theorist can point out that the material theorist ties style to s omething – t he physical features of a painting – that can be correctly understood and accurately described too many ways. A style description of the material conception is not a bare physical description, not the sort of thing at which we could arrive from the perspective of pure science. The claim that The Calling of St. Matthew is more painterly than linear cannot be reduced to, for instance, chemical descriptions of the paints or their relative force on the canvas. There are irreducibly experiential claims involved. And those experiences can vary by time, culture, individual or even subsequent interactions. As such, the material conception of style may not be so material after all. The generative theorist is likely, then, to think the material account guilty of the same unhelpful relativism that besets receptive theories.
On the other hand, the material theorist can point out that our access to the physical proper-ties of a painting is much more accessible than the psychological facts of its production. We can look at and experience the physical properties of The Calling of St. Matthew. If its painterly style depends ( conceptually and not just causally) on Caravaggio’s mental state while painting, there will always be room for skepticism about the style ascription no matter how unanimous and jus-tified our judgment about the painting itself. You may notice that these arguments mirror those typically made by a nti- intentionalists about meaning in artworks. It is worth mentioning here that one could be an intentionalist about meaning and hold a material theory of style just so long as meaning is not determinative of style. Or, like Goodman, we could think that meaning is at least partially constitutive of style and that neither is reducible to artists’ intentions ( Goodman, 1978). Though, as Stephanie Ross points out, when we import meanings into styles, we end up with some other problems – most notably a difficulty distinguishing between style and genre ( Ross, 2005; 5).
Style
153
Our choices, then, seem to be between identifying style with a definite but inaccessible object
and identifying style with an accessible but indefinite object. Neither of these are obviously true
of style. It seems that you and I can share a meaning of “ painterly” while maintaining relatively
non- inferential access to its instances. Jenefer Robinson offers a kind of combined view that avoids
both of these consequences ( Robinson, 1984; Ross, 2005). Extending the view to painting from
the literature on which she focuses, the psychological state in question is that of a presumed artist
whom we know only descriptively as ( something like) “ the artist who painted The Calling of St.
Matthew.” Of course we know Caravaggio uniquely satisfies this description and don’t have to
pretend otherwise. I take the idea here to be that for the purposes of identifying styles we treat
the description – t o use Keith Donnellan’s distinction ( Donnellan, 1966) – a ttributively rather
than referentially. That is, when we say that the predominantly painterly style of the painting is
a function of the artist’s creative mental state, we refer to the mental state of whoever happened
to paint the painting. So while whatever is true of this posited person is causally connected to
what Caravaggio actually did, there may be some things true of the latter that are not true of the
former. Specifically, we are not allowed to attribute anything to the artist that is not accessible
via interaction with the painting itself. So style ascriptions ultimately depend on an object that is
definite – a s someone or other actually painted the c anvas – a nd also a ccessible – because we need
not and in fact cannot go very far beyond what we see in the painting.
As Ross argues in greater detail than I will here, Robinson’s view makes style ascription an
awfully complex activity ( Ross, 2005; 12). We must always infer just enough and never too much
from the painting, and keep distinct the artist to whom we attribute a work from the artist we
know painted it. These acts seem to require a kind of s econd- o rder attention to our attention to
the painting that I for one don’t recognize as being part of the way I attribute styles. In the absence
of a simpler version, I think we can say in general that this sort of synthesis of generative and material
theories resolves their impasse at too great a cost.
2.4 What Determines Style Properties?
We individuated families of theories above by the kind of property to which style ascriptions refer.
We can also characterize theories of style by their account of how those properties are picked out,
leaving it up to individual theories of style to say exactly which properties of the right kind and
picked out in the right way are the style properties. In another context ( the valuation of artworks),
Wollheim provides categories that may be useful to us here ( Wollheim, 1980).
First, a realist about style thinks that identifications of style properties can be truly independent
of any psychological facts about the identifiers. Generative accounts are most obviously at home
with such realism. Caravaggio’s mental state in creating The Calling of St. Matthew is untouched by
our attitudes, beliefs or knowledge of it. But there may be room for a material realism as well, so
long as we can block the argument above that such views collapse into a kind of relativism. I for
one am not optimistic about the success of this strategy, as it would seem to require that there is,
for every painting, one privileged description of it.
Relativism, the view that the truth of style ascriptions depends on some condition of their
utterance – f or instance, the interests of those making t hem – a ppears more amenable to material
theories than generative ones. Yet again, one could think that the psychological states of artists
relevant to style depend on our stylistic interests.
Somewhere between realism and relativism is what Wollheim calls “ objectivism.” Applied to
style, this is the position that style ascriptions depend on the most general kinds of widely ( though
not necessarily universally) shared psychological facts. We are, on an objectivist view, disposed as
the kind of creatures that we are to see The Calling of St. Matthew in a way that will include its stylistic
f eatures – w hether those are ultimate facts about the painting, Carravaggio or an assumed artist.
Frank Boardman
154
Finally, we could think that style ascriptions are n on- cognitive expressions of our attitudes toward paintings. This kind of view, which Wollheim calls “ subjectivism,” may provide the kind of explanation that ( as we said earlier) the skeptic owes us. Perhaps I’m inclined to call The Calling of St. Matthew more painterly than linear because I am moved by the painting and think I’m more likely to be moved by painterly paintings. A similar subjectivism about artistic value may be plau-sible, but this strategy does not seem to fit questions of style. Notice, for instance, that if we are expressivists of this kind about both style and value, there are no substantive differences between the two kinds of claims, and it is not possible for me to have radically different evaluations of works in the same style.
2.5 What Is the Relationship between Individual and General Style?
We have for now focused on individual style. Our last important question for a theory of style is the relationship between this and general style. Again, we have a few options that cut across the theories we’ve been discussing. First, we could deny any close connection between them. Call this the “ discontinuity” view. Wollheim, for instance, is a generative realist about individual style and a relativist about general s tyle – which he takes to be reason enough to be relatively dismissive of the latter ( Wollheim, 1987).
Gilmore departs from Wollheim on this point, as he suggests that general styles emerge from shared briefs among groups of artists ( Gilmore, 2000; 96). This sort of view on which individual styles determine general styles we might call “ individual- first” positions on style.
Naturally, we could also have “ g eneral- fi rst” theories on which general styles are fundamental to individual styles. In favor of such positions, we might notice that it would likely never occur to us to use style predicates without a sufficiently large number of paintings that instantiate them, and that only very rarely do artists create works without awareness of their place in a larger history of general styles.
Finally, we have what we might call “ continuity” theories in which the determinants of indi-vidual style and general style are the same without either depending on the other.
3 A Simple Theory of Style
There are at least two kinds of s elf- flattery that philosophers sometimes have trouble avoiding. The first is a tendency to overrate the originality of a relatively standard idea, and the other is to cover what would be a controversial claim in the banner of standard common sense. If I’m risking one of these mistakes here it is the latter. I don’t pretend to be offering a novel theory – indeed I’m not going to offer a specific account at all. Rather, I’ll u se – p rimarily as an example, but with cautious endorsement – a set of answers to our five questions that I think help us satisfy the criteria we discussed earlier. Let’s call this the “ simple theory” of style, though its tenets as I’ll lay them out more plausibly describe a family of related theories.
The simple theory is neither a skepticism nor a primitivism about style. In the absence of some compelling reason to think otherwise, we should be guided by the fact that in our standard cre-ative, critical and art- h istorical practices we act as though there are styles and that those styles can be analyzed and characterized.
Setting a course through the more contentious questions, we can call the simple theory I have in mind materialist, relativist and continuous. First, recall that the primary advantage of materi-alist accounts was the accessibility of the style properties they posit, but their major disadvantage was the indefiniteness of them. What we need, then, is some way of maintaining the former while avoiding the latter. One way, mentioned above, would be to combine a materialist theory with realism about styles. But again, this move seems implausible. A more profitable strategy will be to
Style
155
become clearer about what exactly style ascriptions are relative to. If they’re relative to individual
interests, indefiniteness is unavoidable. But if instead we take them ( as I think we should) to be
relative to the accurate art- h istorical narratives into which the relevant works feature, there will
be definite, universally recognizable facts about style so long as there are definite, universally
recognizable facts about art history. It may be, then, that it is only true that The Calling of St.
Matthew is more painterly than linear given subsequent artworld developments. Had the history of
art gone another way – if, say, there was no R embrandt – t he claim might be false. But those developments
actually happened as much as Caravaggio’s mental events at the time of the painting’s
creation actually happened. Thus the simple theory achieves both extensional adequacy in that it
accounts for standard artworld practices and intensional adequacy as any artistic property could be
but no artistic property must be stylistic.
What I owe at this point is an account of how a painting could gain or lose style properties
when those properties are determined by material properties of the painting that don’t change.
The details of such an account of style change would take us too far afield ( For more on the topic
see Danto, 1964; Carroll, 1995; Bacharach, 2005; and Levinson, 2011). I hope it will suffice for
now to suggest that being in a particular style may be thought of as a second- o rder p roperty –
a property of material properties of painting. Were it not for later developments in Northern
Europe, Caravaggio’s subtle dissociation of linear and figurative boundaries might never have
been “ painterly” per se. That is to say that certain material properties of the painting may not
ever have become stylistic, not that they might have been materially different from what they are.
Finally, the simple theory is both useful and ( as it had better be) simple by virtue of the continuity
it allows between individual and general style. The same sort of material properties of
individual paintings ( or among an artist’s oeuvre) that determine those styles also determine their
inclusion in or exclusion from general style categories. With such an account, we are able to tell
and analyze both broad and narrow art- historical narratives and make sense of the mutually effective
relationship between those narratives and artistic creativity. We are also able to vindicate our
standard critical practices of contextualizing the properties of individual paintings within larger
narratives and characterizing those larger narratives via features of individual paintings. Just as
importantly, we can do all of this without positing any new entities or unrecognizable senses of
everyday terms.
Works Cited
Ackerman, J.S. ( 1962) “ A Theory of Style,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 20: 227–237.
Anscombe, G.E.M. ( 1963) Intention ( 2nd Edition), Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bacharach, S. ( 2005) “ Toward a Metaphysical Historicism,” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 63:
165–173.
Carroll N. ( 1995) “ Danto, Style, and Intention,” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 53: 251–257.
Danto, A. ( 1964) “ The Artworld,” Journal of Philosophy, 61: 571–584.
Donnellan, K. ( 1966) “ Reference and Definite Description,” Philosophical Review, 75: 281–304.
Gilmore, J. ( 2000) The Life of a Style: Beginnings and Endings in the Narrative History of Art, Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Goodman, N. ( 1978) Ways of Worldmaking, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Levinson, J. ( 2011) “ Artworks and the Future,” in Music, Art, & Metaphysics: Essays in Philosophical Aesthetics,
Oxford: Oxford University Press: 1 79– 2 14.
Robinson, J. ( 1984) “ General and Individual Style in Literature,” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,
43: 147–158.
Ross, S. ( 2005) “ Style in Art,” in The Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics, Jerrold Levinson, Ed., Oxford:
Oxford University Press. Retrieved via Oxford Handbooks Online. https:// doi.org/ 10.1093/ oxfordh
b/9780199279456.003.0012
Wölfflin, H. ( 1950) Principles of Art History: The Problem of the Development of Style in Later Art, M.D, Hottinger,
Trans. New York: Dover Publications.
Frank
Boardman
156
Wollheim, R. ( 1980) “ Art and Evaluation,” in Art and Its Objects ( 2nd Edition). New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. (1987) “Pictorial Style: Two Views” in The Concept of Style, Beryl Lang, Ed., Ithaca, NY: Cornell UniversityPress:183–202.
———. (1995) “Style in Painting” in The Question of Style in Philosophy and the Arts, Caroline van Eck, James McAllister and Renee van de Vall, Eds., New York: Cambridge University Press: 37– 49.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-20 157
16PICTORIAL ORGANIZATION
Bence Nanay
1 Introduction: What Is Pictorial Organization?
Suppose you are trying to take a photograph of an apple and a pear. You put them on the table, directly next to each other. This will be the photographed scene. You still have a lot of decisions to make ( and I’ll ignore decisions about filters or exposure time). If you take the photo from far away, the fruits will hardly be visible. If you come really close, they will take up the entire photo. If you shoot from the side, the pear will completely or almost completely occlude the apple. If you shoot he ad- o n, both will be fully visible. And depending on how you direct your camera, the fruits may end up at the middle of the photo or in the top right corner.
All these decisions are decisions about pictorial organization. Even if the depicted scene is fixed, the picture can come out very differently depending on the pictorial organization. Some of these will be ugly, others less ugly. In the first approximation, the problem of arranging a t hree- dimensional scene on a t wo- dimensional surface is the problem of pictorial organization.
I said that this is the problem of pictorial organization in the first approximation, because things are a bit more complicated. Painters and even photographers often arrange the depicted scene in such a way that it would provide a better pictorial organization. So the depicted scene is often not fixed at all and the painter/ photographer does not look for the best pictorial organization to capture this fixed scene with, but the depicted scene is arranged in a way that would make for the best pictorial organization. Further, we can and do talk about pictorial organization in the case of abstract pictures, where there is no depicted scene to capture – i n this case, the two- d imensional pictorial elements are organized.
Much of the aesthetic merit of a picture comes from its pictorial organization. And according to some extreme formalist views, all aesthetic merit of a picture does. As a result, one would think that this is a key theme of philosophical aesthetics and philosophy or art. But it is not ( see Wollheim 2002, Gaiger 2002, Nanay 2015 for some exceptions). Much more has been written on pictorial organization in art history, film studies, and empirical aesthetics. I will discuss accounts from all these traditions below.
Before I get started, I should acknowledge that the chapter has a bit of a Western or Eurocentric bias. This is not because the question of pictorial organization is a Western or Eurocentric topic. In fact, pictorial organization is aesthetically significant in all cultures. One of the key concepts of Yoruba aesthetics ( the aesthetic tradition of the people of Southwest Nigeria) is that of ‘ ifarahon’, which is often translated as visibility – as the requirement that all parts of the person are clearly formed and visible. While this concept initially applied to sculptures, it has also become the most
Bence Nanay
158
important virtue photographers should aim for ( where it would, for example, imply that the both
of the sitter’s eyes should be visible, see Sprague 1978). Further, in the most detailed early work
of Chinese aesthetics of painting, the 6 th- c entury Chinese painter and critic Xie He outlined the
six laws of painting. The fifth one is about placing and arranging on the surface the pictorial elements
in space and depth ( which became a central topic in all Chinese treatises on paintings from
then on, see Saussy 1993). The third Khanda of Vishnudharmottara Purana, the extremely detailed
encyclopedic Hindu text on painting, written about the same time, is also full of references to pictorial
organization – who should be behind or next to or in front of whom ( Kramrisch 1928). And
pictorial organization has been a central topic of Japanese aesthetics as well. Given the scope of the
present volume, I leave these traditions aside in this chapter, but I deal with the issues of pictorial
organization in the n on- European tradition at great length in Nanay forthcoming.
2 Scene-first Pictorial Organization vs. Surface-first Pictorial Organization
On a very abstract level, there are two different and distinctive modes of pictorial organization,
which I call ‘ surface-first organization’ and ‘scene-first organization’ ( Nanay 2015).1
Surface-first pictorial organization: pictorial elements are organized and grouped according
to their outline shape on the picture surface, and
Scene-first pictorial organization: pictorial elements are organized and grouped according to
their position in the depicted space.
Suppose you need to depict seven identical spheres. On the most general level, there are two ways
of doing this: you can arrange the seven spheres in space and then choose a vantage point in this
space from which you want to depict them. Or you can arrange seven circles ( the outline shapes
of the seven spheres) on the t wo- dimensional surface of the picture. The former method is an
instance of scene-first pictorial organization, whereas the latter one is an instance of surface-first
pictorial organization.
One can completely ignore the surface-first pictorial organization of the picture and focus
entirely on the scene-first organization – this is the way most of us take snapshots at parties.
Or one can ignore the scene-first pictorial organization and focus entirely on the surface-first
organization – children’s drawings often have this kind of pictorial organization.
But most often one pays attention to both – in fact, when taking a snapshot at a party, we often try
to fit everyone into the frame and we also often try not to have someone’s face completely occluded by
someone else’s h air – i n short, we pay attention to the surface organization. What makes the distinction
between surface-first and scene-first pictorial organization especially interesting is that even in
those cases where both of these ways of composing a picture are taken into consideration, as it is most
often the case, one tends to dominate – in case there is a conflict between the surface-first and scenefirst
pictorial organization, one of them tends to win out systematically ( see also Nanay 2018, 2022).
The distinction between scene-first organization and surface-first organization is not a distinction
about how pictures are made. It is about what the spectator is supposed to attend to ( Nanay
2016, 2019). Some pictures are organized in a way that they evoke attention to their surface organization.
Some other pictures demand attention to their scene-first organization.
It is important that both surface-first pictorial organization and scene-first pictorial organization
are about arranging a t hree- dimensional scene on a t wo- d imensional surface. The difference
between them concerns how the t hree- dimensional elements are organized to give us a
two- d imensional composition. So the distinction has nothing to do with the invention of linear
perspective. A picture can use linear perspective and still have surface pictorial organization – in
fact, this is true for most late 1 5th- century Italian paintings.2
Pictorial Organization
159
Whether surface-first or scene-first pictorial organization was dominant clearly changed in
the course of the history of painting. And one can give a (by necessity, oversimplified) narrative
about how the way surface-first and scene-first pictorial organization was traded off characterized
various art historical periods. Importantly, most accounts of pictorial organization throughout
history have focused on one or another of these two different ways of understanding pictorial
organization. In Section 3, I give a ( n on- e xhaustive) overview of accounts of scene-first pictorial
organization and in Section 4, I do the same for surface-first pictorial organization. I then turn
to accounts that combine these two ways of understanding pictorial organization in Section 5.
3 Scene-first Pictorial Organization
The first systematic discussion of pictorial organization in (European in European art history art
history is in Alberti’s De Pictura ( 1435). This is also where the widely used term for pictorial organization,
namely, the concept of composition originates. Alberti’s work contains a lengthy analysis
of compositio: what we would now call pictorial organization ( see Greenstein 1997). The compositio
of pictures, according to Alberti, consists of organizing planes to members, members to bodies,
and bodies to pictures ( or to historia). This organization of elements into higher units has their
rules: for example, according to Alberti, at most nine elements should be organized into the higher
unit and there should be a certain degree of variety between the elements. Michael Baxandall
compared Alberti’s concept of pictorial compositio to the humanist concept of compositio in rhetoric
( that Alberti, like any educated quattrocento Italian, would have been very much aware of ):
organizing words into phrases, phrases into clauses, and clauses into sentences ( Baxandall 1971).
What counts as compositio in Alberti’s sense is a matter of the depicted scene ( see Section 4
for some caveats). The basic unit of pictorial compositio is the surface of depicted objects ( not the
surface of the painting). Not the pigment, that is, the mark on the surface, but rather something
that is depicted. Thus, the equivalent of words, which serves as the basic units of rhetorical compositio,
is, in the case of pictorial compositio, part of the depicted scene. For Alberti, in other
words, pictorial compositio is in the domain of what is d epicted – t he picture surface seems to play
no essential role in pictorial compositio.
An influential concept of 17th- century French art writing was the concept of ‘ mode’. It was the
painter Nicolas Poussin who introduced the term in a letter dated November 24, 1647 ( Poussin
1911, p p. 373– 374). The ‘ mode’ of depiction covers the variety of the elements of the composition,
the differences between them as well as proportion between these elements. Poussin took this concept
from music theory, more precisely from Chapter 1 of Part III of Gioseffe Zarlino’s Istitutioni
Harmoniche ( 1553) ( see Alfassa 1933). In spite of the musical origins, which might appear to suggest
otherwise, as Puttfarken 1985 ( p p . 30– 3 4) argues, the ‘ mode’ of a composition is a matter of scenefirst
pictorial organization, that is, the organization of t hree- d imensional elements that are to be
depicted ( and not of t wo- dimensional elements) on the picture surface ( see also Freedberg 2006).
In spite of the prestigious origins of this way of thinking about pictorial organization, that is,
as the arrangement of t hree- d imensional elements in t hree- d imensional space in order to depict
them, one may wonder whether focusing on this scene-first pictorial organization really addresses
the original question about pictorial organization. After all, scene-first pictorial organization, as
the two historical examples make it clear, is not specific to pictures. In a theatre performance, for
example, the director also needs to organize t hree- d imensional elements in t hree- d imensional
space. And some aspects of pictorial organization are lost if all we mean by pictorial organization
is scene-first pictorial organization.
I mentioned the theatre analogy because the most vivid and extremely influential way of distinguishing
two different forms of pictorial organization also takes theatre as its departure point.
Sergei Eisenstein appropriates the theatrical term ‘ mise- en- scene’ to describe something very
Bence Nanay
160
much like scene-first pictorial organization in the case of film images and contrasts it with ‘ mise- en- cadre’, which would be the equivalent of surface-first pictorial organization. As he says, “ The ‘Mise-en-scene’ is an interrelation of people in action, ‘mise-en-cadre’ is the pictorial composi-tion of shots” ( Eisenstein 1934/ 1957, p p. 15– 1 6). By a ‘ shot’ Eisenstein means “ a single piece of celluloid. A tiny rectangular frame in which there is, organized in some way, a piece of event” (Eisenstein 1934/1957, p. 36).
Eisenstein’s thought is that even if one fixes the m ise- en- scene, there are still a lot of decisions one needs to make when it comes to the m ise- e n- c adre. And, to go back to the original consid-erations about the importance of pictorial organization, even if we keep the mise- en- scene fixed and vary the m ise- en- cadre, some of the resulting images will be ugly, whereas some others will be beautiful. If we want to understand pictorial organization, we need to understand mise- e n- cadre. That is to say, we need to supplement the analysis of scene-first pictorial organization with an analysis of surface-first pictorial organization.
4 Surface-first Pictorial Organization
While Alberti’s concept of compositio is clearly an example of scene-first pictorial organization, he did sometimes make some comments that could be taken to refer to surface-first pictorial or-ganization. For example, he says that “ I blame those painters who, where they wish to appear co-pious, leave nothing vacant. It is not composition but dissolute confusion which they disseminate” ( Alberti 1435/ 1956, Book Two, p p. 75– 76). In short, already in Alberti, we can find indications of the two central ways of thinking about pictorial organization: how to arrange the elements in the scene that is to be depicted and how to arrange them on the canvas. Not leaving any part of the picture vacant is a matter of the latter way of understanding pictorial organization. The humanist rhetoric- inspired organization of the depicted elements is a matter of the former way of under-standing pictorial organization.
To jump forward two centuries, one of the most important concepts in 1 7th- c entury Dutch art writing was the concept of ‘ houding’ ( see Taylor 1992). Willem Goeree writes in 1668 that ‘ houding’ means “ placing each thing, without confusion, separate and well apart from the objects which are next to and around it” ( Inleyding tot d’Algemeene Teykenkonst, p . 129) – t his sounds very much like a matter of organizing pictorial elements on the canvas ( see also the contemporary Roger de Piles’ oeuvre for a similar approach, see Puttfarken 1985, see also Stumpel 1988, Taylor and Quiviger 2000 for the wider historical background of 1 7th- century theorizing about pictorial organization).
In the 20th century, we find more and more discussion of surface-first pictorial organization, no doubt because of the prominence of abstract painting, where scene-first pictorial organization is not applicable.
Many artists in the first half of the 20th century thought of the most important aspect of pic-torial organization as some form of a balance between two- dimensional pictorial elements. Laszlo Moholy- N agy talks about the “ most delicate distribution of rays to the point of a perfect balance between the values of very small and very great tensions” ( Moholy- Nagy 1928, note 2). He uses the following evocative example: “ A small quantity of white is capable of keeping in balance by its activity large areas of the deepest black” ( Mo holy- N agy 1928, appendix). Or as Robert Adams wrote, composition is “ tension so exact that it is peace” ( Adams 1977/ 2009, p . 8). The origin of these approaches is likely to be Paul Klee’s extremely influential Pedagogisches Skitzenbuch(Klee 1925), which aims to teach the basic principles of modernist composition in very simple terms ( and mainly appealing to the balance between abstract shapes on the canvas).
Much of the emphasis on surface-first pictorial organization in the 20th century comes, maybe surprisingly, from film studies, or, more broadly, from thinking about cinema. This may
Pictorial
Organization
161
be surprising as on the face of it cinema is all about scene organization: you need to arrange
the ( three- dimensional) actors in front of the camera. Nonetheless, the history of cinema is rife
with claims about the importance of surface-first pictorial organization ( see Ward 2003). Boris
Kaufman, Dziga Vertov’s brother, who was the director of photography of many classic Hollywood
movies as well as all of Jean Vigo’s films, talked about ‘ the space within the frame’ and the
way that is used in the composition ( his view was that this space within the frame should be used
in its entirety, see de Laurot and Mekas 1995, p. 5). And the most important advice the French film
director Robert Bresson gave to directors and cinematographers was to “ treat your film image as
a surface to cover” ( Bresson 1975/ 1977, p. 13).
And it is not just the film makers who emphasize the importance of surface-first pictorial organization.
Film theorists are equally vocal about this. The key concept of Noel Burch’s analysis of
composition is the frame and the way pictorial elements are organized inside, outside, or around
the frame ( Burch 1973). And Andras Balint Kovacs, in his study of cinematic modernism, appeals
to the distinction between continuous and discontinuous visual texture ( where continuous texture
means large homogenous expanses and discontinuous texture means the lack thereof ), which
is entirely a feature of the way t wo- dimensional elements are organized on the surface ( Kovacs
2007, p. 125).
Another field of research where surface-first pictorial organization has been studied systematically
is in empirical aesthetics. This tradition goes back to the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries,
to the dawn of empirical psychology ( see, e.g., Pierce 1894), but the most vocal proponent was
Rudolf Arnheim, who was interested in the psychological effect of different kinds of compositions
( Arnheim 1954, 1983, see also McManus et al. 2011). After decades of moderately successful experimental
designs, this research program has matured considerably in the last couple of decades.
One old and venerable topic under this heading is the golden section. This blatantly s urface-first
pictorial organizational feature has been widely discussed for several centuries and it has been argued
that putting key pictorial elements in the golden section adds to the aesthetic merits of the
picture. The current consensus is that claims about the importance of this specific surface-first
organizational feature may have been vastly exaggerated ( see Green 1995 and McManus and
Weatherby 1997 for summaries).
Another important phenomenon that has been widely studied empirically is how balanced the
picture is. As we have seen, balance has been a major topic in the first half of the 20th century
among visual artists, but also among art theorists ( like Arnheim). As a result of the growing unpopularity
of both Gestalt theory and pictorial formalism, the concept of balance has not received
much attention in the next couple of decades, until recent development of empirical methodologies
for assessing the psychological impact of balanced compositions ( Gershoni and Hochstein
2011, McManus et al. 1985, Wilson and Chatterjee 2005, but see also Leyssen et al. 2012 for a
skeptical take).
Much of the empirical aesthetics studies of pictorial organization are conducted on very simple
compositions, often consisting of one or two simple shapes against a blank background ( Palmer
et al. 2008, 2012, 2013, Shimamura and Palmer 2012, Sammartino et al. 2012). This not only
makes the empirical comparison of compositions that differ in one single dimension easier, but it
also raises problems about the applicability of this research program to the kind of complex compositions
we encounter in a museum or in the cinema.
But recent empirical studies aim to bridge this gap. One way of doing so is to compare complex
but formally similar pictorial features, like views of Mount Fuji from a distance ( and examine
how placing this pictorial feature at different parts of the canvas influences aesthetic appreciation
( see, e.g., Bruno forthcoming). Another way is to examine how the placement of simple but salient
pictorial features ( like eyes in portraiture) influences aesthetic appreciation ( see Tyler 1998,
McManus and Thomas 2007, Bruno et al. 2019).
Bence
Nanay
162
An especially promising branch of empirical aesthetics addresses the cross- cultural variations in the aesthetic evaluation of surface-first pictorial organization. Observers in Japan, for example, are more appreciative of large unfilled expanses of the picture surface than Western observers ( Carbon and Fingerhut 2017) – again, very much a difference in surface-first pictorial organization.
5 Combining Scene-first Pictorial Organization and Surface-first Pictorial Organization
I have examined theories of ( or considerations about) scene-first pictorial organization and surface-first pictorial organization separately in the last two sections. But the most important accounts of pictorial organization talk about the relation between these two forms of pictorial organization.
Scene-first pictorial organization and surface-first pictorial organization are brought together by the late 19th- and early 20th- c entury formalist tradition, especially by Alois Riegl and Hein-rich Wölfflin. I will focus on Wölfflin here ( but see Riegl 1901/ 1985). Wölfflin famously gave us five pairs of concepts, which he called the fundamental concepts of art history, to make it easier to talk about pictorial organization: Linear vs. Painterly, Plane vs. Recession, Closed vs. Open form, Multiplicity vs. Unity, and Absolute vs. Relative clarity. Here is a brief characterization of these pairs of concepts:3
a Linear vs. Painterly:
Linear: “ the sense and beauty of things is first sought in the outline” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 18)
Painterly: “ the primary element of the impression is things seen as patches” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 18)
b Planimetric vs. Recessive:
Planimetric “ reduces the parts of a total form to a sequence of planes” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 15)
Recessive “ emphasises depth” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 15)
c Tectonic vs. A - tectonic ( or, closed vs. open form):
Tectonic: “ the picture is dominated in all its parts by the opposition of vertical and hori-zontal” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 126) and “ pictorial elements are grouped round a central axis or, if this does not exist, so as to produce a perfect balance of the two halves of the picture” (Wölfflin 1915/1950, p. 125)
A-tectonic: “ aversion from stabilisation about a middle axis” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 125)
d Multiplicity vs. Unity:
Multiplicity: “ the single parts, however firmly they may be rooted in the whole, maintain certain independence” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 15)
Unity: “ abolishes the uniform independence of the parts in favour of a more unified total motive” (Wölfflin 1915/1950, p. 159)
e Absolute vs. Relative clarity ( or, clearness vs. unclearness):
Absolute clarity: “ exhaustive revelation of form” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 196)
Relative clarity: “ pictorial appearance no longer coincides with the maximum of objective clearness, but evades it” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p. 196)
The reason why I introduced these categories in great detail is to show that each of these pairs of “ fundamental concepts” could be thought of as special forms or maybe case studies of the surface-first pictorial organization vs. scene-first pictorial organization distinction ( see Nanay 2015 for a detailed argument for this claim). Surface-first pictorial organization, for example, tends to be linear, whereas scene-first organization tends to be painterly.
Pictorial
Organization
163
Here is a quick example. In the discussion of the last pair of concepts, of Absolute and Relative
clarity, Wölfflin says that “ life does not arrange its scenes in such a way that we can see everything
and that the content of what is happening determines the grouping” ( Wölfflin 1915/ 1950, p . 208).
The implication is that pictures that are composed in a way that maximize absolute clarity do arrange
their scenes in such a way that we can see everything. Wölfflin’s memorable example is the
depiction of hands: in Leonardo’s Last Supper, 26 out of the 26 hands of the 13 depicted characters
are visible. In the Staalmeesters by Rembrandt, in contrast only 5 out of the 12 hands of the 6 depicted
characters are visible. But showing all the hands of all the depicted characters is something
that only makes sense if we follow surface pictorial organization: to make sure that all 26 hands fit
into the frame and are not occluded by something else. Absolute clarity is an aspect of surface-first
pictorial organization, whereas relative clarity is an aspect of scene-first pictorial organization.
In other words, rather than focusing only on scene organization or only on surface organization,
Wölfflin brings together the analysis of how the depicted t hree- dimensional elements are
organized in space and how the two- d imensional pictorial elements are organized on the picture
surface. Different painters ( or image- makers in general, see David Bordwell’s way of extending
Wölfflin’s analysis to the film image, Bordwell 2015) in different times ( and in different parts of
the world) used different ways of composing pictures. Some paid more attention to the surface.
Others paid more attention to the scene.
Every picture, regardless of where and when it was made, falls somewhere on the spectrum
between surface-first organization and scene-first organization. There is a trade- off between the
two and most pictures are trying to combine them. But one – either scene-first or surface-first
organization – tends to win out when the two organizational principles are in conflict.
But we don’t need to go along with Wölfflin’s category pairs to substantiate the claim that there
is a t rade- off between scene-first organization and surface-first organization. There are some
much simpler features of pictures that are indicative of this ( and ones that are easier to spot). I will
give two simple examples.
First, in everyday perception, we get a lot of occlusion: we see some objects behind or in front
of other objects. The question is whether occlusion shows up in pictures. Surface organization
implies that the picture maker pays attention to whether there is occlusion or not: occlusion in a
picture is a feature of how two- dimensional outline shapes of the depicted objects are related to
each other on the t wo- dimensional surface. Some pictures go out of their way to avoid occlusion.
Some others pile on occlusions. Both are good indications of surface organization. And we can
place all pictures on a spectrum between extreme lack of occlusion and extreme seeking out of
occlusion.
Pictures from some cultures will cluster around specific points of this occlusion spectrum.
This means that the image- makers care a great deal about the presence or absence of occlusions
in pictures. As a result, both of these types of pictures would count as having surface-first pictorial
organization. Pictures of some other cultures, in contrast, are not particularly bothered by
the presence or lack of o cclusion – t his is an indication of scene-first organization: if a picture is
organized in terms of the t hree- dimensional scene it depicts, then neither occlusion nor the lack
of occlusion will be particularly important.
Second, in everyday perception, some of our visual field is often empty in the sense that there
are no perceptually interesting elements t here – o nly the sky, the ground, and an empty wall.
Some pictures deliberately try to avoid empty surface: they try to put pictorially interesting elements
on every square inch of the surface. Others deliberately seek out empty surfaces.
Again, paying attention to whether some part of the surface is empty or not is very much an
indicator of surface-first pictorial organization. Scene-first organization is neutral about whether
some parts of the surface remain unfilled. As in the case of occlusion, pictures with surface-first
organization will cluster around some specific points of the empty surface spectrum ( pictures from
Bence Nanay
164
different cultures around different points). Pictures with scene-first organization, in contrast, are scattered around much of this spectrum.
This way of extending the broadly Wölfflinian way of thinking about pictorial organization would give us a coordinate system: occlusion and empty surface would be two of the axes. But we can add other features like whether the picture respects the frame or whether it pays attention to symmetry.
In this section, I talked about the trade- o ff between surface-first pictorial organization and scene-first pictorial organization and how in order to understand pictorial organization per se; we need to take both into consideration. A final reason for doing so comes from examples where surface-first pictorial organization and scene-first pictorial organization don’t work against each other, but rather go hand in hand. I want to conclude with an analysis by Richard Wollheim, who has done more to draw attention to the importance of pictorial organization in recent philoso-phy than anyone else. In Raphael’s The Expulsion of Heliodorus, the fall of Heliodorus on the right is counterbalanced by the boys climbing up a column on the left. And to make things even more complex, it is this interaction between the upward movement on the left and the downward movement on the right that draws our attention to the middle of the composition, to the praying High Priest in the background ( Wollheim 2002, p . 10). This is a beautiful example of how some pictures are composed in a way that both surface-first pictorial organization and scene-first picto-rial organization play a crucial role.4
Notes
1 In Nanay 2015, I called these t wo- d imensional and t hree- d imensional pictorial organization, respectively. I now think these labels may have been more confusing than helpful.
2 What I call scene-first pictorial organization should not be confused with Berenson’s concept of ‘ space composition’ either. Berenson defines space composition as the “ sense of space not as a void, as some-thing merely negative, such as we customarily have, but on the contrary, as something very positive and definitely able to confirm our consciousness of being, to heighten our feeling of vitality” ( Berenson 1897/ 1968), p. 88) and goes on to argue that it is intimately tied to religious experience ( ibid., p p. 89– 90) – a s omewhat surprising claim... A closer approximation for pure ( or close to pure) surface pictorial organization is the way Alois Riegl described – rightly or w rongly – the pictorial organization of ancient art, see Riegl 1901/ 1985, esp. p . 24.
3 Wölfflin applied these categories in the case of paintings, sculptures, and architecture. Given the present topic, I will only consider these categories as applied to pictures.
4 The work on this chapter was supported by the ERC Consolidator grant [726251], the FWF-FWO grant [G0E0218N], the FNS-FWO grant [G025222N] and the FWO research grant [G0C7416N].
References
Adams, Robert 1977/ 2009 Denver: A Photographic Survey of the Metropolitan Area, 1 970– 1 974. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Alberti, Leon Battista. 1435/ 1956 On Painting ( translated by John R. Spencer). New Haven: Yale University Press.
Alfassa, P. 1933 L’origine de la Letter de Poussin sur les Modes D’apres un Travail Recent. Bulletin de la Societe de l’Histoire de l’Art francais1:125–143.
Arnheim, R. 1954 Art and Visual Perception: A Psychology of the Creative Eye. Berkeley, CA: The University of California Press.
Arnheim, R. 1983 The Power of the Center: A Study of Composition in the Visual Arts. Berkeley, CA: The Uni-versity of California Press.
Baxandall, Michael 1971 Giotto and the Orators. Oxford: Clarendon.
Berenson, Bernhard. 1897/ 1968 Italian Painters of the Renaissance. London: Phaidon.
Bordwell, D. 2015 Wölfflin and Film Style: Some Thoughts on a Poetics of Pictures. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism73:178–188.
Pictorial
Organization
165
Bresson, Robert. 1975/ 1977 Note on the Cinematographer. Paris: Gallimard, 1975, New York: Urizen, 1977.
Bruno, N. forthcoming T hirty- six Views of X Reveal Individual Artist’s Approaches to Composition. Art
and Perception forthcoming. DOI:10.1163/22134913-bja10003
Bruno, N., Bertamini, M. and Tyler, C. W. 2019 Eye Centering in Selfies Posted on Instagram. PLoS ONE
14(7): e0218663.
Burch, N. 1973 Theory of Film Practice. New York: Praeger.
Carbon, C. C. and Fingerhut, J. 2017 Bridging art and the visual sciences. Art and Perception 5(4): 347–352.
de Laurot, Edward L. and Mekas, Jonas.1955 An Interview With Boris Kaufman. Film Culture 1, 4(Summer): 1–9.
Eisenstein, S. 1934/ 1957 Through Theatre to Cinema. In J. Leyda ( ed.): Eisenstein: Film Form. Cleveland:
World Publishing Company, pp. 3–18.
Freedberg, D. 2006 Composition and Emotion. In Turner, M. ( ed.) The Artful Mind. New York: Oxford
University Press, pp. 73–89.
Gaiger, Jason. 2002 The Analysis of Pictorial Style. British Journal of Aesthetics 42: 20–36.
Gershoni, S. and Hochstein, S. 2011 Measuring Pictorial Balance Perception at First Glance Using Japanese
Calligraphy. i-Perception 2: 508–527
Green C. D. 1995 All that Glitters: A Review of Psychological Research on the Aesthetics of the Golden
Section. Perception 24: 937–968
Greenstein, Jack M. 1997 On Alberti’s ‘ Sign’: Vision and composition in quattrocento painting. Art Bulletin
79: 669–698.
Klee, Paul. 1925 Pedagogisches Skitzenbuch. Munich: Langen.
Kovacs, A. B. 2007 Screening Modernism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kramrisch, Stella. 1928 The Vishnudharmottara Part III: A Treatise On Indian Painting And I mage- Making. Calcutta:
Calcutta University Press.
Leyssen, M. H. R., Linsen, S., Sammartino, J. and Palmer, S. E. 2012 Aesthetic Preference for Spatial Composition
in Multiobject Pictures. i-Perception 3: 25–49.
McManus, I. C., Edmondson, D. and Rodger, J. 1985 Balance in Pictures. British Journal of Psychology 76:
311–324
McManus, I. C., Stöver, K. and Kim, D. 2011 Arnheim’s Gestalt Theory of Visual Balance: Examining the
Compositional Structure of art Photographs and Abstract Images. i-Perception 2: 615–647
McManus, I. C. and Thomas, P. 2007 Eye Centering in Portraits: A Theoretical and Empirical Evaluation.
Perception 36:167–182
McManus, I. C. and Weatherby, P. 1997 The Golden Section and the Aesthetics of form and Composition:
A Cognitive Model. Empirical Studies Arts 15: 209–232
Moholy- Nagy, Laszlo. 1928 Photographie Ist Lichtgestaltung. Bauhaus 2: 1–8.
Nanay, Bence. 2015 T wo- dimensional Versus Three- dimensional Pictorial Organization. Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism 73: 149–157.
Nanay, Bence. 2016 Aesthetics as Philosophy of Perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nanay, Bence 2018 Threefoldness. Philosophical Studies 175: 163-182.
Nanay, Bence 2019 Aesthetics: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nanay, Bence 2022 The sensory individuals of picture perception. Philosophical Studies 179: 3729-3746.
Nanay, Bence. forthcoming Global Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Palmer, S. E., Gardner, J. S. and Wickens, T. D. 2008 Aesthetic Issues in Spatial Composition: Effects of
Position and Direction on Framing Single Objects. Spatial Vision 21: 421–449
Palmer, S. E., Schloss, K. B. and Gardner, J. S. ( 2012) Hidden knowledge in Aesthetic Preferences: Color
and Spatial Composition. In Shimamura, A. P., & Palmer, S. E. ( ed.) Aesthetic Science: Connecting Minds,
Brains, and Experience. New York: Oxford University Press.
Palmer, S. E., Schloss, K. B. and Sammartino, J. 2013 Visual Aesthetics and Human Preference. Annual
Review of Psychology 64: 77–107.
Pierce, E. 1894 Aesthetics of Simple Forms I: Symmetry. Psychology Review 1: 483–495
Poussin, N. 1911 Correspondance de Nicolas Poussin, ed. C. Jouanny, Tomme V. Paris: H. Champion.
Puttfarken, T. 1985 Roger de Piles’ Theory of Art. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Riegl, Alois. 1901/ 1985 The Late Roman Art Industry. Rome: Giorgio Bretschneider Editore.
Sammartino, J. and Palmer, S. E. 2012 Aesthetic Issues in Spatial Composition: Effects of Vertical Position
on Framing Single Objects. Journal Experimental Psychology: Human Perception Performance 38(4): 865–879.
Saussy, H. 1993 The Problem of a Chinese Aesthetic. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Shimamura, A. P. and Palmer, S. E. ( eds.) ( 2012) Aesthetic Science: Connecting Minds, Brains, and Experience.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Sprague, Stephen F. 1978 Yoruba Photography. African Art 12: 52–107.
Bence
Nanay
166
Stumpel, Jeroen. 1988 On Grounds and Backgrounds: Some Remarks about Composition in Renaissance Painting. Simiolus: Netherlands Quarterly for the History of Art18(4):219–243.
Taylor, Paul 1992 The Concept of Houding in Dutch Art Theory. Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Insti-tutes55: 210–232.
Taylor, P. and Quiviger, F. ( eds.) 2000 Pictorial Composition from Medieval to Modern Art. London and Turin: Warburg Institute.
Tyler, C. W. 1998 Painters Centre one Eye in Portraits. Nature392:877–878.
Ward, Peter. 2003 Picture Composition for Film and Television. Burlington, MA: Focal Press.
Wilson, A. and Chatterjee, A. 2005 The Assessment of Preference for Balance: Introducing a New Test. Empirical Studies of the Arts32: 165–180
Wölfflin, Heinrich. 1915/ 1950 Principles of Art History. New York: Dover.
Wollheim, Richard. 2002 On Pictorial Organization. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-21 167
17REALISM
Catharine Abell
1 Introduction
There is a range of possible answers to the question of what it is for a painting or a sculpture to be realistic, because there are different notions of realism. One notion holds that the realism of a painting or a sculpture is a measure of how entrenched the system of representation it employs is ( Goodman 1976). Another holds that a painting or sculpture is realistic if it tends to provoke in its viewers the illusion of seeing the scene it represents ( Gombrich 1977).
I have no objection to construing either as a form of realism or to the claim that paintings and sculptures can exhibit both. However, my concern here is with a different notion of realism in painting and sculpture, one that measures detail and accuracy in the depictive or sculptural rep-resentation of appearances. This notion is much closer to that which art critics and art historians employ when they praise the realism of Vermeer’s and Caravaggio’s paintings and of Bernini’s sculptures. These artists achieved significant advances in realism by developing new ways of rep-resenting things, rather than employing entrenched methods of representation. Moreover, their works are not apt to produce the illusion of seeing the things they represent. What makes them exceptionally realistic seems instead to be that they capture their objects’ appearances very accu-rately and in great detail.
Several philosophers have developed accounts that fit with such a notion of realism ( Abell 2007, Hyman 2004, Kulvicki 2006, Lopes 1995, Newall 2011, Schier 1986). My aim here is not to ad-judicate between these different accounts. Instead, I will begin by offering a broad, general char-acterisation of the notion of realism at issue, one that I hope advocates of different accounts will be able to endorse. Having done this, I will identify two problems for this broad characterisation that arise as a consequence of the fact that painted and sculptural representations of things that do not exist can be realistic in the sense at issue here. I will then determine how we need to modify our broad characterisation of this notion of realism in order to accommodate such representations.
2 Realism as Detail and Accuracy in the Perceptual Representation of Appearances
Paintings and sculptures can represent their objects more or less realistically. However, they can employ various forms of representation, not all of which are relevant to determining their re-alism. Bernini’s unfinished sculpture Truth Unveiled by Time represents truth allegorically, as a naked woman. It perceptually represents a naked woman and, in virtue of doing so, allegorically
Catharine Abell
168
represents truth. The sculpture’s realism is determined solely by the way in which it perceptually
represents the naked woman. More generally, the realism of a painting or a sculpture is determined
exclusively by the way in which it perceptually represents or depicts its object. Although
it might employ further, symbolic or allegorical forms of representation, these are irrelevant to
its realism.
Depiction is a determinate of the determinable perceptual representation. It is the specific form
of perceptual representation exhibited by pictures, which involves the representation in two dimensions
of three- dimensional things. By contrast, sculpture employs a form of perceptual representation
in which three- dimensional space is represented three dimensionally. These different
forms of representation are perceptual because they enable the representation only of perceptible
features of their objects. Things like time cannot be perceptually represented because they are not
perceptible. So long as we have a p re- theoretical grip on the notion of perceptual representation
and on how it differs from symbolic or allegorical representation, we need not enquire further into
its nature in order to characterise realism in terms of it.
At a first pass, the realism of a painting or a sculpture, or indeed of any perceptual representation,
is a matter of how well it captures its object’s perceptible appearance within the limitations
that its medium imposes on what it can represent perceptually. Films and photographs can be realistic
in the sense at issue. The fact that the medium of film enables the perceptual representation
of auditory as well as visual appearances means that films can be realistic in virtue of capturing
their objects’ auditory as well as their visual appearances.
Because objects’ perceptual appearances play a causal role in the production of films and photographs
of them, film and photography may seem to be paradigmatically realistic media, with
few limits on which aspects of an object’s appearance they can represent perceptually. However,
there are aspects of objects’ visual appearances that paintings and sculptures can perceptually represent
that films and photographs cannot, or cannot perceptually represent in the same way. For
example, the media of film and photography impede the simultaneous representation of aspects
of perceptual appearances that do not occur simultaneously. Film can represent non- s imultaneous
aspects of its objects’ visual appearances, but it has difficulty doing so simultaneously. Although
time- lapse photography can simultaneously perceptually represent n on- simultaneous aspects of
objects’ visual appearances, it does so at the expense of the detail with which it represents those
aspects of objects’ visual appearances. By contrast, painting and sculpture can simultaneously perceptually
represent, in detail, aspects of objects’ visual appearances that they do not exhibit simultaneously.
This affects their realism. For example, both a portrait painting and a sculpture can be
strikingly realistic in virtue of simultaneously perceptually representing different facial and bodily
expressions all of which are characteristic of its subject, although not simultaneously exhibited.
Painting and sculpture differ in which aspects of objects’ visual appearances they can perceptually
represent. Sculptures can perceptually represent objects’ visual appearances independently of
any particular perceptual point of view on those objects. By contrast, paintings can only capture
the visual appearances their objects present from a particular perceptual point ( or points) of view.
Nevertheless, there are aspects of the appearances of their objects that paintings can capture but
sculptures cannot. For example, paintings can depict the appearances their objects exhibit under
specific conditions of illumination, while sculptures are generally unable to do so, because they
typically lack the means of perceptually representing conditions of illumination.
There is a range of interesting further questions concerning which aspects of objects’ visual
appearances can be perceptually represented in painting and in sculpture and thus about the
respects in which paintings and sculptures can be realistic. For example, are painting and sculpture,
as static media, restricted to the perceptual representation of static appearances, or does the
fact that they can simultaneously perceptually represent aspects of appearance that their objects
exhibit non- s imultaneously mean that they can perceptually represent the visual appearances of
Realism
169
objects in motion? Depending on how we answer this question, we may want to claim that Bernini’s
Apollo and Daphne realistically portrays Daphne fleeing from Apollo, or transmogrifying
into a tree, rather than merely realistically portraying Daphne at a particular moment of flight or
transmogrification.
How well a painting or sculpture captures its object’s visual appearance depends on both the
detail with which it perceptually represents that object’s appearance and on the accuracy with
which it does so. These two dimensions, detail and accuracy, do not operate independently of one
another to determine realism. A painting or sculpture that is inaccurate is not realistic, no matter
with how much detail it inaccurately perceptually represents its object. Similarly, a painting or
sculpture that accurately perceptually represents its object will not be realistic if it does not perceptually
represent that object in sufficient detail. For example, a child’s stick figure finger painting
of her mother may accurately represent her mother as possessing two legs and two arms but,
because it perceptually represents few further features of her mother’s appearance, it is not realistic.
Various questions remain about the respective roles of detail and accuracy in determining realism.
One concern is how we are to cash out the notion of detail. Does the detail of a painting
or sculpture depend on the number of features it perceptually represents its object as possessing
( Schier 1986), or on its how informative it is about its object ( Lopes 1995)? If the latter, how should
we understand the notion of informativeness?
Another concern arises because detail and accuracy with respect to some features of an object
seem more important to determining realism than detail and accuracy with respect to others. For
example, portrait paintings often perceptually represent their subjects’ hands and faces in much
greater detail than they do their clothing, but this disparity in the detail with which the different
aspects of subjects’ appearances are perceptually represented does not seem to detract from the
portraits’ realism as it would do if subjects’ clothing were represented in much greater detail than
their faces and hands. Similarly, inaccuracies in the perceptual representation of a subject’s dress
would not usually detract from a portrait’s realism to the same degree as inaccuracies in the perceptual
representation of her face.
This raises the question of which features of an object a painting or sculpture must perceptually
represent accurately and in detail in order to be realistic. Some accounts of realism take the
variability of the contribution that detail and accuracy in the perceptual representation of different
features of an object make to realism to be evidence of its interest- relativity. For example, Lopes argues
that realism is relative to the purposes for which pictures are used in different contexts ( Lopes
1995: 283). Elsewhere, I have defended a more restricted interest- r elative construal and argued
that how realistic a perceptual representation of an object is depends on how much it can teach
one about the appearance of that object, where this depends on one’s existing beliefs ( Abell 2007).
An adequate account of realism should provide answers to questions such as these and, by
doing so, should illuminate the role of both detail and accuracy in perceptual representation in
determining realism. For present purposes, however, I will set these questions aside. In what
follows, I want to focus instead on an important challenge to the claim that the notion of realism
with which I am concerned can be characterised partly in terms of accuracy. My discussion so far
has suggested that, although it is not sufficient, the accurate perceptual representation of visual
appearances is necessary for realism. The fact that paintings and sculptures of both mythical and
purely fictional objects can be realistic in the sense at issue here threatens to undermine this claim.
Things that do not exist do not have visual appearances that can be perceptually represented accurately
or inaccurately. How, then, can Apollo and Daphne be realistic given that neither Apollo nor
Daphne ever existed to provide a standard against which the accuracy of Bernini’s representation
can be determined? Although several attempts have been made to resolve this problem, I will
argue that no adequate solution to it has yet been provided. Examining how it ought to be solved
will yield a better understanding of the role of accuracy in determining realism.
Catharine Abell
170
3 Realistic Representations of Non- Existent Particulars
Many paintings and sculptures perceptually represent fictional or mythical entities. A statue of the fictional character Sherlock Holmes by the sculptor John Doubleday stands at the site of 221B Baker Street in London where, according to Conan Doyle’s novels, the detective lived. The statue is stylised rather than realistic, but a realistic statue of Sherlock Holmes could have been produced in its stead. However, there is no detective Sherlock Holmes. Even if someone did exist who had all the properties Conan Doyle attributed to Sherlock Holmes in his novels about that character, that person would not be Sherlock Holmes because Conan Doyle was not referring to that person when he wrote his novels ( Kripke 2013: 26– 27). Fictional people are necessarily n on- existent.
To accommodate realism in the representation of fictional characters, we must distinguish between realism qua representation of a particular and realism qua representation of an object of some type. Paintings and sculptures can be realistic in the first of these ways only if they represent particular, existent people and things. Paintings and sculptures that perceptually represent particular fictional or mythical entities or that perceptually represent an object of some type but not a particular object of that type cannot be realistic qua representations of particulars. A sculpture of Sherlock Holmes can be realistic, although there is no such person as Sherlock Holmes, because it can per-ceptually represent the appearance of a man in an Inverness cape and a deerstalker smoking a pipe accurately and in detail and, according to Conan Doyle’s novels, Sherlock Holmes is such a man.
Paintings and sculptures of actual people can be realistic qua representations of a person of a particular type even if they are not realistic qua representations of the particular people at issue. For example, many of Velasquez’s portraits of Felipe IV of Spain depict him as being better look-ing than he in fact was. They are therefore not particularly realistic qua portraits of Felipe IV, although they are realistic qua paintings of a dashing blond young king.
4 Realistic Representations of Entities of Fantastical Types
The distinction between realism qua representation of a particular and realism qua representation of an object of some type provides only a partial solution to the problem of how it is possible re-alistically to represent non- existent entities. This is because it is possible realistically to represent fantastical entities of types of which there are no actual instantiations. It is impossible accurately perceptually to represent the visual appearances of objects of such types, because there are no ob-jects of that type whose appearances can be captured more or less accurately. In such cases, there-fore, distinguishing between the representation of particulars and the representation of objects that are merely of a certain type provides no purchase on the problem. Whereas the type man in an Inver-ness cape and a deerstalker smoking a pipe has, in all likelihood, been instantiated, the type satyr has not.
One might attempt to accommodate the fact that paintings and sculptures of satyrs can exhibit differing degrees of realism by construing realism as measuring how accurately perceptual repre-sentations capture our conceptions of the visual appearances of things ( Kulvicki 2006). On such an approach, because we have a conception of how satyrs look, we can have realistic paintings and sculptures of them. This approach has the advantage of providing a uniform explanation of how paintings and sculptures of both Sherlock Holmes and satyrs can be realistic which obviates the need to distinguish realism qua representation of particulars from realism qua representations of objects of a type. It holds that, because we can have conceptions of the visual appearances of both non- existent particulars and objects of non- existent types, each can be represented realistically. However, as a general account of realism, it is implausible. This is because, when the things of whose visual appearances we have conceptions exist, our conceptions of their appearances can differ from the appearances they actually have. For example, many of us conceive of human heads as having eyes located above the ears, whereas in fact both are located at roughly the same height.
Realism
171
Even if one wrongly conceives of human heads as having such an appearance, a painting or sculpture
in which the eyes are located above the ears will strike one as odd and unrealistic, whereas
one in which they are located at the same height will strike one as comparatively realistic in virtue
of this fact. The visual appearances things actually have, not those we conceive of them as having,
determine the realism of perceptual representations of them.
Furthermore, paintings and sculptures of fantastical objects can exhibit varying degrees of
realism even when we lack any independent conception of the fantastical objects at issue. Odillon
Redon’s painting The Monster depicts a monstrous creature of whose visual appearance Redon’s
painting provides the sole specification. Our only conception of the monster is provided by
Redon’s painting and therefore cannot serve as an independent standard against which we can
measure the realism of Redon’s depiction of it. Nevertheless, Redon’s painting exhibits a certain
degree of realism, and this degree is less than that of some other paintings. This is impossible to
explain on a view according to which realism is a measure of the extent to which perceptual representations
accurately reflect our conceptions of their objects’ visual appearances since, by such
a standard, all paintings and sculptures that are themselves the sole source of our conceptions of
their objects’ visual appearances should be maximally realistic.
One might attempt to accommodate the fact that paintings and sculptures of fantastical objects
of which we have no independent conception can exhibit differing degrees of realism by
construing realism as predominantly a property of styles or systems of perceptual representation,
and only derivatively of individual such representations ( Lopes 1995). On such an account, what
makes a painting or sculpture realistic is that it belongs to a system that can be used to convey
accurate information. Paintings and sculptures can be realistic even when they provide the only
specifications of the nature of the fantastical things they represent, because they employ systems
of perceptual representation that, when used to represent things that do exist, accurately capture
the visual appearances of those things.
The problem with this suggestion is that it wrongly assumes that all paintings or sculptures
that employ a given system of perceptual representation are equally realistic. This is not the case.
Whether or not a painting or sculpture in a given system of representation is realistic depends on
the nature of its object. For example, a system of depictive representation which involves painting
the outlines of objects, as employed by Van Gogh in The Bedroom, can be used to produce moderately
realistic paintings of solid objects, such as beds and chairs and tables, but cannot be used
to produce realistic paintings of objects with indeterminate outlines, such as clouds or ghosts or
gases. A painting or sculpture of a fantastical object cannot be realistic simply in virtue of the fact
that it employs a system of representation that can be used to convey accurate information about
the visual appearances of things, since there is no guarantee that the system at issue can be used to
convey accurate information about the visual appearances of things of the type to which it belongs.
One cannot remedy this problem by construing the realism of a painting or sculpture of a fantastical
object as a measure of the extent to which the system of representation it employs can be
used to convey accurate information about the visual appearances of things of the type to which
that object belongs, because how realistic the painting or sculpture is depends on precisely on how
well it reflects the determinate type to which the fantastical object in question belongs. Consequently,
absent an independent specification of its type, one cannot appeal to the type to which
it belongs in specifying the determinants of the realism of representations of it, since this would
presuppose an answer to the question of how realistic it is.
5 Realism in Narrative Representations
Let us leave the nature of realism in painting and sculpture aside temporarily, in order to reflect
on the nature of realism in fiction films. They too can be realistic despite depicting objects of
Catharine Abell
172
fantastical types of which there are no actual instances. Seeing how the problem of realism in the perceptual representation of objects of fantastical types can be solved in the case of film will help us to see how it can be solved in the case of painting and sculpture.
Fiction films are perceptual representations, and also fiction narratives. It is often claimed that the content of a fiction narrative, its fictive content, is not wholly determined by what it represents explicitly. In the case of a film, this entails the claim that its fictive content is not wholly deter-mined by what it represents perceptually. Kendall Walton argues that some fictive content is di-rectly generated, while some is generated indirectly ( Walton 1990: 142). Directly generated fictive content is determined directly by the features of a fiction narrative, independently of any other fictive content. Generally speaking, what a fiction film perceptually represents directly generates the fictive content that things are as it perceptually represents them as being. He argues that fur-ther fictive content is generated indirectly on the basis of this d irectly- generated fictive content by general principles of indirect generation. On one construal, such a principle holds that the fictive content of a fiction film is as much like reality as is compatible with its directly- g enerated fictive content. ( Walton 1990). Consider a film that perceptually represents a man as wearing a gold band on the third finger of his left hand, and thereby directly generates the fictive content that the man wears a gold band on that finger. Such a film will indirectly generate the fictive content that the man is married, so long as, in reality, men of the type perceptually represented who wear gold bands on that finger do so because they are married.
What is important for present purposes is that, on such a construal, the fictive content of a fiction film is not wholly determined by what it represents perceptually. If Walton is correct that the fictive content of fiction films is determined partly by principles of indirect generation, one can appeal to the fictive content of a fiction film as a standard against which to assess the realism of what it represents perceptually. On this proposal, a fiction film is realistic to the extent that it perceptually represents its fictive content.
We can construe the realism of a fiction film in this way even when it perceptually represents objects of fantastical types of which there are no actual instances. For example, there are no extra terrestrials of the type perceptually represented by the film ET. Nevertheless, on the principle that the fictive content of ET is as much like reality as is compatible with what it perceptually represents, then ET will have certain kinds of features ( for example, his skin will have some tex-ture, and his eyes will be of some colour). The realism with which the film ET represents ET is determined by how many of these features the film ET perceptually represents ET as possessing.
This proposal is immune to the criticism I levelled against the proposal that the realism of a perceptual representation of some object is determined by the extent to which the system of rep-resentation it employs enables one to convey accurate information about objects of its type. The present proposal does not make illegitimate assumptions about the nature of the type of object a film perceptually represents, but takes this to be determined independently by the principles of indirect generation. Moreover, the proposal’s plausibility does not depend on fictive content being indirectly generated in accordance with precisely the principle described above ( for criticisms of the claim that fictive content is indirectly generated in accordance with such a principle, see Abell 2020). It requires only that: 1) there is some mechanism or set of mechanisms by which a film’s fictive content is determined that is independent of what it represents perceptually; and 2) that the mechanism or mechanisms at issue determine the fictive content of perceptual representations of both existent objects and objects of fantastical types of which there are no actual instances.
If the proposal is correct, fiction films can exhibit two distinct forms of realism. A fiction film is extra-narrativelyrealistic to the extent that the way it perceptually represents things as being reflects the way things are. ET is not extra- narratively realistic, because extra terrestrials of the type it represents do not exist. A fiction film is intra-narrativelyrealistic to the extent that it perceptually represents the film’s fictive content ( See Abell forthcoming for more detailed discussion of each
Realism
173
form of realism). ET is reasonably intra- narratively realistic, because it perceptually represents
ET as having many of the perceptible features that, according to the mechanisms governing the
generation of fictive content, ET has.
6 Realism in Painting and Sculpture
Earlier, I characterised the realism of a painting or sculpture as a matter of how well it captures its
object’s perceptible appearance within the limitations that its medium imposes on what it can represent
perceptually. We do not consider an unpainted marble portrait bust to be unrealistic because
it is in grey marble, although the person it perceptually represents did not have marbled grey skin.
The bust’s medium prevents the sculptor from perceptually representing the colour of its subject’s
skin, so we ignore the difference between the colour of the bust and the colour of its subject’s skin
when assessing the realism with which the bust perceptually represents its subject. For the same reason,
we do not consider a painting unrealistic because it is flat while its subject is three- dimensional.
The limitations imposed by their media mean that paintings and sculptures can never provide
completely determinate perceptual representations of their objects. There are additional reasons
why paintings and sculptures may fail to do so. For example, there are practical limitations, such
as those imposed by the time available to painters and sculptors, to the determinacy with which
they perceptually represent things. It is also limited by their skill. While we do not expect perceptual
representations of things to capture their determinate visual appearances, we do expect
them to capture the distinctive features of their visual appearances insofar as this is possible within
the limitations imposed by their media. That is, we expect a painter or sculptor who perceptually
represents an object to perceptually represent those of its features that distinguish it from other
things. This constitutes a norm of perceptual representation, to which painters and sculptors attempt
to conform insofar as they are able. Limits to their skill may preclude them from doing, but
they will violate the norm as a result, leading us to evaluate their works negatively.
I propose that this norm of perceptual representation plays a role in determining the visual
appearances of the things paintings and sculptures perceptually represent that is akin to the role
mechanisms of fictive content determination play in determining the fictive content of films and
other narrative representations. Because such a norm governs painters’ and sculptors’ acts of perceptual
representation, we can legitimately make the defeasible assumption that the things they
perceptually represent are as much like things are in reality as is compatible with the way they
perceptually represent them as being. If painters and sculptors have perceptually represented the
distinctive features of their objects’ visual appearances, the remaining visual appearance features
of those objects will be of the same type as those exhibited by the things that most resemble them
with respect to the visual appearances they are perceptually represented as having. This assumption
is defeasible because those objects might have distinctive features that cannot be perceptually
represented due to limitations either of the painter’s or sculptor’s skill or of the medium in question.
Nevertheless, absent evidence of such limitations, we are warranted in making it.
This assumption enables us to determine the realism of paintings and sculptures of existing
things with whose particular visual appearances we are unfamiliar, so long as we are familiar
with the visual appearances generally exhibited by things that look like them. It also enables us to
determine the realism of paintings and sculptures of things of fantastical types that do not exist.
Because there are no actual objects with visual appearances similar to theirs, the inferences this
assumption licenses about such objects’ visual appearances will be much less specific than those
they licence about the visual appearances of existent entities. Consequently, we will be able to
infer only that their visual appearances have features of a type common to the visual appearances
of many things, none of which resembles them very closely: that they have t hree- d imensional
shapes of some fairly abstract type, surface colours and textures of similarly abstract kinds, and so
Catharine Abell
174
on. Moreover, we will be able to infer that they have determinate t hree- d imensional shapes and colours, although we will not be able to say very much about the shapes and colours in question.
A painting or sculpture realistically perceptually represents an object of a fantastical type of which we have no independent conception to the extent that it perceptually represents that object as having the features that the norm licenses us to infer that it possesses. For example, the monster in Redon’s painting The Monster has a humanoid face and ears like the fins of a fish. No actual creature exhibits this combination of features. Redon’s painting provides the sole specification of the monster’s appearance and the specification it provides is indeterminate. For example, it does not pronounce on whether or not the monster’s face has wrinkles and furrows as those of ordinary people do, or on whether its ears share the more determinate features of fishes’ fins. Nevertheless, the norm enables us to infer that the monster’s face has determinate contours similar to those of real people and that its ears have determinate features similar to those of fishes’ fins. The painting is not particularly realistic because we are able to infer that the monster has many visual appear-ance features that Redon’s painting does not perceptually represent it as possessing.
Paintings and sculptures of things of fantastical types are not the sole determinants of the vi-sual appearances of their objects. The norm governing painters’ and sculptors’ acts of perceptual representation also plays a role in determining the visual appearances of the things they percep-tually represent, licensing the inference that those things have visual appearance features of the same type as the real things that most resemble them in visual appearance. Like fiction films, paintings and sculptures can exhibit two distinct forms of realism. A painting or sculpture is extra-representationally realistic to the extent that the way it perceptually represents things as being reflects the way things are. It is intra-representationallyrealistic to the extent that it perceptually represents the visual appearance of the thing it perceptually represents within the limitations imposed by its medium. To the extent that they conform to the norm, paintings and sculptures of existing things, whether particular things or merely things of a certain type, will be realistic in both these ways if they are realistic in one. Paintings and sculptures of n on- existent entities cannot be realistic in the first of these ways, but can be realistic in the second.
7 Conclusion
Paintings and sculptures of n on- e xistent things of fantastical types cannot be realistic in virtue of accurately perceptually representing the visual appearances of those things. Because there are no things of those types, they have no visual appearances that paintings or sculptures of them can perceptually represent either accurately or inaccurately. Nevertheless, paintings and sculptures of those things can be realistic. Their realism is a measure of the determinacy with which they cap-ture the visual appearances of the fantastical things they perceptually represent. They can capture the appearances of those things more or less determinately because they alone do not determine the appearances of those things. The norm that governs the way in which painters and sculptors perceptually represent those things also plays a role in determining their appearances. It licences the inference that their appearances are as much like the appearances things have in reality as is compatible with the way they are perceptually represented as being, within the limitations that the media painters and sculptors employ impose on what they can represent perceptually. Accuracy is indirectly relevant to the realism of paintings and scuptures of things of fantastical types because the way things are plays a role in determining the appearances of those things.
References
Abell, Catharine 2007. Pictorial Realism, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 85:1, 1–17.
Abell, Catharine 2020. Fiction: A Philosophical Analysis, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Realism
175
Abell, Catharine ( forthcoming). The Norms of Realism and the Case of Non- Traditional Casting, Ergo.
Gombrich, Ernst 1977. Art and Illusion, London: Phaidon.
Goodman, Nelson 1976. Languages of Art, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company.
Hyman, John 2004. Realism and Relativism in the Theory of Art, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 105:
25–53.
Kripke, Saul 2013. Reference and Existence, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kulvicki, John 2006. Pictorial Realism as Verity, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 64:3, 343–354.
Lopes, Dominic 1995. Pictorial Realism, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 53: 277–285.
Newall, Michael 2011. What Is a Picture?: Depiction, Realism, Abstraction, London: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Schier, Flint 1986. Deeper Into Pictures, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Walton, Kendall L. 1990. Mimesis as Make-Believe, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
176
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-22
18
FUNCTIONAL ART
Glenn Parsons
That artifacts, generally speaking, are functional is a truism. Yet this plain truism has created
many difficulties for theorists of art, at least in the Western tradition. The most glaring example of
this is the l ong- s tanding precariousness of the artistic status of architecture, the most thoroughly
functional of all artforms. However, issues concerning function arise, in some form or another,
across the arts.
In this essay, I focus on the role played by talk about function in the critical evaluation of art. I
begin by discussing two general issues: the relation between function and art evaluation and issue
of how to determine the function of a given artwork. In considering these issues, I outline a possible
framework for thinking about the role of art’s function in critical evaluation. I then consider
some specific issues raised by the application of this framework to the traditional ‘ p lastic arts’ of
painting and sculpture. For, with the exception of architecture, these artforms bring out most
vividly the issues concerning art’s functionality that have vexed art criticism.
1 Function and Art Criticism
“ F unction” is a word with a wide range of uses. A fruitful way to approach the notion of function
in art is in terms of its use in specifying legitimate or proper appraisal. In general, to say that something
“ has the function F” is to say that it is supposed to do F, and so to open it up to criticism if
it fails to do so. If a particular piece of metal and rubber has the function of clearing rain from a
car’s windshield, but cannot do so, then it is a poor windshield wiper. In such contexts, function
thus generally operates as normative notion.
This normative usage may, in many contexts, be extended to artworks. In many n on- W estern
cultures, objects and activities that, pre- theoretically, we would identify as art ( ceremonial masks,
weapons, ceramics) clearly have functions and are evaluated and appreciated in light of them. A
war mask that doesn’t serve its function of inspiring fear in one’s enemies, for example, is a poor
war mask. Functional considerations have also been applied normatively to much traditional art in
the West. Even setting aside architecture, religious painting and commemorative public sculpture
offer examples of s o- called Fine Arts where functional considerations have played an important
role in criticism.
In the West, however, such acknowledgement of the functional aspect of art has long been in
tension with ideas of artistic autonomy and the aesthetic, ideas often taken to specify competing
norms of proper appraisal. Conceptions of aesthetic or artistic value have, for instance, often
emphasized disinterestedness, restricted proper appreciation to an object’s formal or expressive
Functional Art
177
qualities, or to its artistic meaning, and ruled out considerations relating to practical functionality.
The influence of such ideas is apparent in 2 0th- century Modernist movements in sculpture and
painting, which embraced these norms in a particularly pure form.
Given these conflicting norms for art evaluation, three philosophical options present themselves.
The first option is to exclude functional considerations from a work’s assessment qua art.
So far as the assessment of a work as art goes, its function is irrelevant, or ( w hat comes to the same
thing) the only legitimate function of art is to serve as a source of aesthetic or artistic value. On
this sort of view, which we can loosely describe as the ‘ art for art’s sake’ view, the n on- Western
art objects described above may be good art, but only insofar as they provide aesthetic or artistic
value— by possessing pleasing shapes and colors, for example, or by expressing certain feelings or
ideas. What an object’s practical function is, or how well it serves it, has no bearing on its artistic
value.
A second option is to reject independent norms of aesthetic or artistic value and accept only
the norms associated with function as relevant to art. This is the line taken by Leo Tolstoy ( 1898),
who dismissed beauty as an illegitimate norm for art, and endorsed the communication of religious
feeling as art’s function and the only legitimate standard for its evaluation. This approach is
tantamount to equating artistic value with functional value.
Neither of these approaches is very satisfactory, however. A wholesale exclusion of functional
considerations from criticism leaves us unable to handle explicitly functional art, of both Western
and n on- Western varieties. For in many cases, the practical function of a work does seem to affect
its artistic or aesthetic value: seeing an object as a ceremonial spear, for example, may affect our
assessment of the appropriateness of its design as well as of the ideas it expresses. If such considerations
are ruled out, such works can only be accommodated to criticism through a distortion
whereby they are taken as something other than they are ( i.e., as functionless objects).
The second approach, reducing a work’s artistic value to its functional value, fares no better.
For on this approach, we lose our grasp of artistic value as an intrinsic value. A valuable artwork,
or the experience of it, seems to be valuable not merely as a means to something else, but in and
of itself. Thus, artistic evaluation cannot simply be determined by the extent to which the work
accomplishes its function: indeed a work may have artistic value even if it fails to accomplish that
function ( Budd, 1995). Thus, we may draw a contrast between the value of Art and the merely
functional value of a tool. Equating these also leaves us with no critical apparatus for handling
Modernist art of the explicitly functionless variety. Although Tolstoy was willing to roundly condemn
all such works, this hard critical line has found few sympathizers.
A third option, which aims to provide a critical framework for both functional and nonfunctional
art, has been more popular. This involves accepting both norms as relevant for art evaluation,
but seeing them as in some way integrated such that artistic value is not simply equated
with functional value, but neither is artistic value independent of functionality. This approach can
allow that some artworks have no practical function, aiming only to provide aesthetic or artistic
value, but that others, such as the non- W estern works mentioned above, do and that their function
plays a role in their evaluation.
The task for this approach is to specify the precise connection between artistic or aesthetic
value and function, and here a range of suggestions has been offered. One view, often associated
with Kant’s notion of dependent beauty, is that an object’s function simply constrains the ways in
which it can have aesthetic value. Interior decor that might seem bold and lively in a nightclub,
for example, might look garish and oppressive in a church. Others have seen an object’s function
as contributing in a positive fashion to aesthetic value, producing as it were, a ‘ functional beauty’.
A common view in the 18th century, for example, held that things could be beautiful in virtue of
appearing capable of fulfilling a function ( s ee Parsons and Carlson, 2008). A related idea, which
later became a shibboleth in Modernist design and architecture, is the notion that beauty results
Glenn Parsons
178
when ‘ form follows function’, producing some kind of appealing economy or unity in the object.
Recent discussions have produced still other variations of the concept of ‘ functional beauty’
( Parsons and Carlson, 2008, Davies, 2006, Sauchelli, 2013, De Clercq, 2013; Shiner, 2011).
Explications of the idea of functional beauty, while they integrate functional considerations
into aesthetic or artistic value, generally stop short of making an object or work’s actual functional
success or failure a criterion of that value. Thus, the beauty of a functional object is determined
by how its form and function are integrated, not by how well the object realizes that function.
Accounts that do allow functional success to contribute to artistic value, typically restrict the function
of art either to an aesthetic function ( I seminger, 2004), or to the intentions and goals of the
work’s creator ( G ilmore, 2010). This points to a second key theoretical issue: how is the function
of a particular artwork even to be determined?
2 Determining Function
This second question is not only entwined with the first, but in fact, poses a thornier difficulty.
Although philosophers frequently attribute this or that function to an artwork, the basis for these
attributions is often unclear. Where philosophers do offer some theoretical basis for their particular
attribution of function, these tend to be idiosyncratic, with various philosophers arriving
at their attributions on wholly different grounds. In short, there exists no commonly endorsed
framework for thinking about function attributions regarding artworks.
Moreover, critical and theoretical discussions of art often involve a wide range of competing
claims about ‘ the function’ of particular works of art. A particular civic sculpture might be said
to have the function of honoring a historical figure, expressing the artist’s particular ideas or
emotions, boosting the local economy by attracting tourists, providing a visual balance to a city
square, objectifying women through its depiction, aiding the mayor’s chance of reelection, or
simply providing onlookers with a valuable artistic or aesthetic experience. In many such cases,
the relevance of these various suggestions to critical evaluation of the work is unclear, and some of
them directly conflict with each other. To its critics, Rodin’s Monument to Balzac failed completely
in its commemorative function, but its defenders emphasized its success in expressing Rodin’s
particular artistic vision of its subject.
How should we respond to this array of ostensible functions of Art? Can we determine, in
any principled way, which ones ought to play a role in art criticism? One might be tempted to
skepticism on this question, seeing talk about function as so loose and indeterminate as to be useless
in art criticism. However, we might hope to adjudicate between these conflicting function
attributions by getting clear on the general idea of ascribing a function to an artifact, and this has
been the subject of focused debate in several other areas of philosophy, notably the philosophy of
biology and the philosophy of technology ( f or a review, see Preston, 2009). These philosophical
discussions of function provide useful resources for constructing a framework for understanding
the function of art.
One such resource is the distinction between functions and proper functions. If I use an iron as a
doorstop, we can say that the iron now is functioning to keep the door open, or ‘ functioning as’ a
doorstop: in that sense, it has taken on a new function. But in another sense, of course, its function
has not changed: the object is really still an iron, an object whose function it is to press clothes,
not hold doors open. It does not seem possible to change this fact about its function by putting it
to an ad hoc use, such as using it to keep a door open. Moreover, the function of pressing clothes
seems to have a normative force that the other lacks. An iron that fails to press clothes well can
be said to be malfunctioning, whereas the same can hardly be said for an iron that fails to keep a
door open. We can distinguish the latter, less changeable sort of function from the former one by
Functional Art
179
calling it the object’s proper function. Whereas some functions are merely, as it were, imposed on
an object by accident or by ad hoc use, proper functions belong to the object.
In terms of this distinction, our question about identifying ‘ the function’ of an artwork can
be rephrased as the question “ Which of the suggestions corresponds to the proper function of the
artwork?” The issue then becomes how to distinguish the proper function of a given artifact from
any other functions it may possess.
Traditionally, the most common approach to understanding artifact function in general has
been to analyze it in terms of human intentions ( for an example, see Neander, 1991). This seems
very intuitive, since artifacts are, by definition, the products of human intention. If we ask “ W hy
does an iron have the proper function of pressing clothes?”, an obvious answer is: “ B ecause the
person who designed that type of artifact—the iron—intended it to press clothes”. Other functions
that an iron may have, such as holding a door open, might similarly be analyzed in terms of
the intentions of users of the artifact. Applied to artworks, this approach would identify a work’s
proper function with the effect intended by the artist.
On the other hand, however, function talk is not restricted to artifacts: it is also pervasive in
descriptions of the natural world, and in particular of biological parts and traits. The function of
the heart, for example, is to pump blood throughout an organism’s circulatory system. Setting
aside certain creationist views, the functions of the parts and traits of animals cannot be ascribed
to ‘ the intentions behind them’, and so reference to them must be understood in naturalistic terms.
Naturalistic analyses of function in biology have opened up alternatives to the traditional intentionalist
approach to artifact function.
One such account is the notion of systemic ( o r causal role) function: an effect that an entity has that
plays a role in explaining the operation of a larger system to which it belongs ( Cummins, 1975).
On this account, the heart has the function of pumping blood in the circularity system because
this is what the heart does that helps explain the circulatory system’s capacity to distribute nutrients.
A different account grounds the function of a trait in its causal history or etiology. On this
account, camouflage coloration, for instance, has the function of making an animal difficult to see
because, in the past, instances of such coloration enhanced survival by reducing predation, leading
to the propagation of this trait type. In simpler terms, the function of a trait is the effect that
explains why that sort of trait evolved (see e.g., Godfrey-Smith, 1994).
These naturalistic accounts may be applied to artifacts to produce an alternative to the traditional
intentionalist approach. On such an account, while artifacts may have intentional or
systemic capacity functions, they “ g et [their] proper functions by a process analogous in basic
respects to the n atural- selection process by which biological traits get theirs” ( Preston, 1998, 243).
A given sort of artifact may be created for an intended purpose, and be put to many different
uses, but its proper function will be the use for which it has been manufactured and reproduced
( Preston, 2003, Parsons and Carlson, 2008). Take, for example, the colorful sort of pipe cleaner
sold in craft stores ( Preston 1998). Though originally invented to clean smoking pipes and occasionally
put to o ne- o ff uses, such as holding a ponytail in place or serving as a twist tie, these have
the proper function of serving as craft materials, since this is the reason that they continue to be
manufactured.
Together these ideas provide the outlines of a framework for dealing with the profusion of
function attributions to artworks. Various function attributions can be classified according to the
sort of function proposed: some such suggestions identify the artist’s aims ( intentional functions),
while others specify effects of the work on some larger whole of which it is a part ( systemic functions).
Still others will pick out an etiological function of the work’s type. In critical contexts
where we wish to determine ‘ t he function’ of the object, it is the proper f unction— i .e., its etiological
function—that we are seeking.
Glenn
Parsons
180
There are two motivations for this claim. The first is that, as noted, proper functions correspond
most closely to the idea of ‘ t he function’ of the work, or the function that the work itself has.
Second, excluding intentional or systemic functions in this context comes at no cost to criticism,
since the factors involved—artist intentions and social impact—are already established elements
of critical discourse. Nothing is gained by confusing these factors with the concept of artistic
function. Narrowing our conception of art’s function not only provides a determinate meaning to
the notion but also provides a way of resolving disputes concerning function, since the etiology of
artifact types is an empirical issue ( Parsons, 2011).
The proposed approach to functional criticism raises a worry, however. How do we know that
artworks actually possess any proper functions? An etiological theory ascribes proper functions to
reproduced artifact types, such as spoons, shovels, and screwdrivers. It is a w ell- c anvassed feature
of this theory that it does not attribute functions to novel objects. But contemporary artworks, it
may be thought, are precisely such novel objects, being individual, singular entities rather than
instances of any reproduced type. Furthermore, it may seem that this individuality and novelty is
a part of the very concept of Art. Functional criticism, as we have defined it, may therefore seem
irrelevant to contemporary art. In the final section, I explore the significance of this objection,
with respect to contemporary painting and sculpture.
3 Painting and Sculpture as Functional Types
As noted earlier, in the history of Western Art, much so- c alled Fine Art was explicitly functional.
This is especially true of painting and sculpture, as much painting was religious, and much sculpture
was commemorative in nature, memorializing important leaders or events. The plastic arts
were well- suited to such roles, producing durable physical works that could be situated in public
spaces ( Carter, 2010). In their physicality, painting and sculpture were thus akin to the most functional
artform of all, architecture, with which they were often entwined.
The commemorative function of sculpture, in particular, was traditionally so prominent that
the critic Rosalind Krauss could identify it as the very essence of the artform:
The logic of sculpture, it would seem, is inseparable from the logic of the monument. By
virtue of this logic a sculpture is a commemorative representation. It sits in a particular place
and speaks in a symbolical tongue about the meaning or use of that place.
(1979, 33)
However, the commemorative ‘ l ogic of sculpture’ was undone, according to Krauss, by the revolutionary
work of sculptors such as Rodin, who moved the artform away from commemoration
and s ite- specificity and toward Modernist norms of individual expression and abstraction.
Although in the past, sculpture may have constituted a reproduced type, driven by the commemorative
impulse, today it seems difficult to discern any such unifying motivation for the production
of sculptural works, which are strikingly diverse in aim and appearance.
However, it would be hasty to conclude that the concept of function has no application to
contemporary sculpture or painting. For, first of all, the demise of the commemorative impulse is
often exaggerated. Hilde Hein, for example, says,
The monolithic cultural assumptions implicit in Roman forum statuary or an altar triptych
or even the typical town square equestrian statue are no longer viable. The supposition that
a visual form, an anthem, or a text might express its deepest values or unify a coherent social
group has become a relic of romantic history.
(1996, 2)
Functional
Art
181
Yet clearly there has been no extinction of public sculpture with the traditional commemorative
function of old, for everywhere we see continued production of military, disaster, and civic
memorials. These works may not always be successful in expressing a particular community’s
deepest values or in unifying the relevant social group, but nonetheless this is the reason that they
are financed, produced, and displayed. To say that such works of sculpture are ‘ n o longer viable’
may be plausible as a blanket critical statement about the artistic significance of such commemorative,
works from the perspective of gallery or ‘ fine Art’ sculpture. From a broader perspective,
however, commemorative works clearly are viable, insofar as they continue to be widely commissioned
and produced. Art criticism ought to make space for the evaluation of such works, and to
the extent that it does so, a functional analysis of this persisting type of art is essential.
The relevance of functional analysis to contemporary sculpture and painting goes beyond the
persistence of the traditional commemorative type, however. Many contemporary works fall into
the category of public art: works commissioned for a given space not to signify a specific event,
person, or idea, but simply to ‘ be art’ in that particular location. On the surface, these works appear
to be of a piece with non-functional gallery-oriented art. Works such as Henry Moore’s Three-
Way Piece No.2 ( 1966), a public sculpture commissioned for Toronto’s City Hall, have no representational
content. When public sculptures do have representational content ( A ntony Gormley’s
Angel of the North, for example), their meaning is not determined prior to commission but left open
to artistic expression and choice. Seen in this way, public art might be thought to have no proper
function, as it is not supposed to do anything in particular. It is simply l arge- s cale art paid for by,
and accessible to, the general public.
But there is clearly something missing in this account, for there do seem to be reasons why
this generally expensive type of art is ( increasingly) produced in various cities across the world.
Pitches for public art support typically appeal to various benefits such works might deliver,
including economic stimulation for local communities and cultural enrichment. As one philosopher
opines “ This may well be a proper function of a public artwork, to provoke critical
reflection and dialogue on the space it occupies…” ( H orowitz, 1996). If public artworks are
selected, and financed, on the basis of their ability to fulfill this sort of role, then a case can be
made that contemporary ‘ public art’ sculpture and painting does have a proper function. Moreover,
acknowledging this functional dimension is essential if we are to appropriately evaluate
public artworks. Public artworks that have rich artistic meaning but fail to fulfill their function
of engaging the relevant public in an effective manner cannot be said to be successful as works
of public art ( Carter, 2010).
It may be objected that, in applying only to traditional commemorative art and contemporary
public art, the proposed framework for functional criticism applies only to marginal cases, and
therefore offers little of substance to the resources of criticism. However, a concept of functional
evaluation of art need not apply to all artworks to play a useful role: on the contrary, the main
conceptual difficulty with the notion to date is that it is frequently asked to do too much and thus
finds no clear application. A narrower understanding of artistic function, such as the one suggested
here, offers not only conceptual clarity but also a critical approach to works that have been historically
marginalized by the more standard approaches to the evaluation of art.
Further Reading
Preston ( 2009) provides a very useful and comprehensive survey of philosophical theories of artifact function.
Differing analyses of the relation between aesthetic value and function can be found in Davies
( 2006) and Parsons and Carlson ( 2008). Parsons ( 2011) applies an etiological conception of function to
a particular critical dispute. An intentionalist treatment of function in art evaluation is developed by
Gilmore (2010).
Glenn
Parsons
182
References
Budd, M. (1995) Values of Art: Pictures, Poetry and Music. London: Penguin Books.
Carter, C. ( 2 010) “ T oward an Understanding of Sculpture as Public Art”, International Yearbook of Aesthetics,
14, 161–179.
Cummins, R. (1975) “Functional Analysis”, Journal of Philosophy, 72, 741–765.
Davies, S. ( 2006) “ Aesthetic Judgements, Artworks, and Functional Beauty”, Philosophical Quarterly, 56,
224–241.
De Clercq, R. ( 2013) “ Reflections on a Sofa Bed: Functional Beauty and Looking Fit”, Journal of Aesthetic
Education, 47, 35–48.
Gilmore, J. ( 2010) “ A Functional View of Artistic Evaluation”, Philosophical Studies, 155, 289– 305.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (1994) “A Modern History Theory of Functions”, Nous, 28, 344–362.
Hein, H. ( 1996) “ What Is Public Art?: Time, Place, and Meaning,” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,
54, 1–7.
Horowitz, G. ( 1 996) “ P ublic Art/ P ublic Space: The Spectacle of the Tilted Arc Controversy”, Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 54, 8–14.
Iseminger, G. (2004) The Aesthetic Function of Art. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Krauss, R. ( 1979) “ Sculpture in the Expanded Field,” October, 8, 30–44.
Neander, K. ( 1991) “ The Teleological Notion of ‘ Function’”, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 69, 454–468.
Parsons, G. ( 2011) “ Fact and Function in Architectural Criticism”, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 69,
21–29.
Parsons, G. and Carlson, A. ( 2008) Functional Beauty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Preston, Beth. ( 1 998) “ W hy Is a wing like a spoon? A Pluralist Theory of Function”, Journal of Philosophy,
115, 215– 254.
———. (2003) “Of Marigold Beer: A Reply to Vermaas and Houkes”, British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 54, 601–612.
———. (2009) “Philosophical Theories of Artifact Function”, Handbook of the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 9
Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences. A. Meijers (ed.), Oxford: Elsevier, 213–233.
Sauchelli, A. ( 2013) “ Functional Beauty, Perception, and Artworks”, British Journal of Aesthetics, 53, 41–53.
Shiner, L. ( 2011) “ On Aesthetics and Function in Architecture: The Case of the ‘ Spectacle’ Art Museum”,
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 69, 31–41.
Tolstoy, L. (1898/1995) What Is Art? Pevear & Volokhonsky ( trans.). London: Penguin Books.
PART
IVArt and Science

DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-24 185
19EVOLUTION AND THE FINE ARTS
Tobyn De Marco
Art is among the pinnacles of Homo sapiens. Yet, discussing connections between art and human nature tends to invoke either revulsion ( those with humanist inclinations), or an unexcited and matter- o f- f act assent ( those with scientific inclinations). Daniel Dennett has noted, “ The very idea that evolution by natural selection might have a foundational role to play in understanding human culture fills some people, even wise people, with loathing” ( Dennett, 2017; 24– 2 5). Historically, such connections are not uncommon; for example, both Plato and Aristotle appealed to human nature in discussing the arts. In the Poetics, Aristotle points out that humans have an innate predi-lection ( instinct) for mimesis ( 1 448b5- 1 9). Nowadays, appealing to human nature means using the natural and social sciences, including evolutionary biology and related fields. Biologists, anthro-pologists, and psychologists consider human art behaviors important, perhaps as important as any other practice or technology ( e.g., stone tools), for understanding the development of hominid and hominin species, especially the psychological development of Homo sapiens, as a new book’s title reveals: Squeezing Minds from Stones ( Overmann and Coolidge, 2019). In fact, some scientists think that an adequate biological theory of the world and its organisms is incomplete without an under-standing of beauty and art behaviors. In a recent book, Richard O. Prum states, “ I will argue that we need an evolutionary theory that encompasses the subjective experiences of animals in order to develop an accurate scientific account of the natural world” ( 2017; 7). This essay is an overview, with a focus on painting and sculpture, of the problems facing us in attempting to explain art be-haviors, of some of the main evolutionary explanations of art behaviors, and the relevance ( or lack thereof) of such explanations to aesthetics and philosophy of art.
1 Methodological Issues
There are thorny philosophy of science and biological issues involved, many of which are not exclusive to explaining art behaviors. To demonstrate the depth and ubiquity of the methodolog-ical issues, consider the following questions and problems. Besides questions about the nature of explanation generally, and the nature of explanation of social phenomena, which also raises issues about the relationship between the social sciences and the physical sciences, there are deep ques-tions about the correct method to use to generate accurate accounts of human behavior. Although acceptance of biological explanations for human behavior and culture has increased recently, the use and limits of biological explanations for human behaviors are still questioned, or their role in other types of explanations is unclear. Currently, within biology, anthropology, and archaeol-ogy, there are numerous controversies and questions about natural selection, adaptation, sexual
Tobyn De Marco
186
selection, cultural evolution, units of selection, etc. But, of course, these are beyond the scope of
this essay. Nonetheless, it is worthwhile to mention some of these general problems to glean an
idea of what is at stake and to contextualize what is to follow.
In addition to the philosophical and scientific issues, there are problems within aesthetics that
must be sidestepped here. If one is attempting to explain art behaviors, what is art behavior? Do
we need an adequate definition of art to determine what art behaviors are? Changing the concept
to “ aesthetic” behaviors does not help because we will face the same definitional problems.
Thus, to begin a discussion about explanations of art behaviors, one must make some reasonable
assumptions. Consequently, I follow Stephen Davies in referring to “ art behaviors” ( Davies, 2012)
and Henrik Høgh- O lesen’s “ aesthetic impulses” ( Høgh- Olesen, 2019). Davies defines art behaviors
as “ the creation, presentation, reception, and appreciation of art” ( 2012; 117), which includes
domestic, decorative, folk, mass, and popular art ( 2012; 45), and the seeking and valuing beauty.
Additionally, and perhaps slightly broader, Høgh- Olesen defines universal aesthetic impulses as
“ the human need to embellish itself and its surroundings” ( 2019; 7).
When discussing explanations, one should be clear about the explanandum. Thus, what is the
proper object and subject of explanation? Since art behaviors are a subset of hominid behaviors,
art behaviors should be treated like any other human behavior. But are we trying to explain art
behaviors themselves, or the prerequisite and requisite traits necessary for art behaviors, such as
motor, cognitive, and perceptual skills and habits? What are the requisite and prerequisite phenotypic
traits necessary ( or at least sufficient) for art behaviors? For example, some theorists think
that art behaviors exploit cognitive and perceptual traits that are adaptations for non- a rt behavior
functions. This is the neural reuse view ( d’Errico and Colagè, 2018), which is a common approach
in explaining other human behaviors and traits. Perhaps, we should seek to explain creativity
generally, or the desire and motivated action for beauty and related aesthetic properties, counterfactual
reasoning, imagination of alternative worlds, or pretense. Furthermore, art and aesthetic
behaviors may be subsumed under what some psychologists and anthropologists call symbolic
behavior. Thus, some theorists think that symbolic behavior and thinking is the proper object
of explanation ( see, for example, Cosmides and Tooby, 1992; Mithen, 1996; Chatterjee, 2014;
Prum, 2017; Wilson, 2017). Although it is probable that Homo sapiens’ capacity for culture is itself
adaptive, this does not entail that every behavior that results from that capacity is adaptive. In fact,
some behaviors of that capacity may be neutral, non- b eneficial, or even maladaptive because the
behaviors are costly.
Even when one focuses on art behaviors, an important methodological question remains. Is
there one evolutionary explanation for all art behaviors generally, or do individual art forms ( or
even genres) warrant different explanations? In other words, there may be separate evolutionary
explanations for each art form ( e.g., music, literary arts, painting and drawing, dance). Currently,
the latter have been active approaches for especially music and the literary arts ( Gottschall
and Wilson, 2005; Mithen, 2005; Boyd, Carroll, and Gottschall, 2010; Davies, 2012; 158– 1 82;
Gottschall, 2012; Morley, 2013; Honing, 2018). Nonetheless, evolutionary accounts of general art
behaviors tend to emphasize drawing, painting, and sculpture as paradigm examples for constructing
such theories. The advantage of explaining painting and sculpture is that the archaeological
record, particularly from the Upper Paleolithic period, is more directly available than for music,
literary arts, and other art forms ( more on this below).
Furthermore, there are questions about the proper subject of explanation. Explanations of
art behaviors can be limited to consideration of just Homo sapiens’ behavior, or other hominid
and hominin species, or, perhaps, all mammals. For example, are explanations for bowerbirddecorated
nests and pufferfish making designs out of sand on the sea floor relevant for explaining
hominid art behaviors? Nonetheless, for w ell- established phylogenetic and cladistic reasons, behaviors
of other hominid and hominin species ( e.g., Acheulian h and- axes, Neanderthal symbolic
Evolution and the Fine Arts
187
behaviors) seem to be relevant for explanations of Homo sapiens behavior. Hence, consideration
of prehistoric art behaviors, including the earliest art behaviors of Homo sapiens, is crucial to an
evolutionary explanation of art behaviors.
Currently, no clear consensus views have emerged on many of these methodological issues.
Consequently, one finds many theorists, working within many disciplines, approaching the evolutionary
explanation of art behaviors from a diversity of perspectives and methods.
2 Prehistoric Art Behaviors
When did hominins, hominids, and Homo sapiens begin engaging in art or aesthetic behaviors?
The oldest stone tools associated with hominins are circa ( c.) 2.4 million years old, which were
found in the Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania ( stone tools found in the Wonderwerk Cave in South
Africa have similar dates). Stone tool use predates any artifacts that may be considered the result
of material symbolic culture and art behaviors. Fossil evidence indicates that Homo sapiens
comes into existence between 200,000 and 300,000 years ago ( ya). Gregory Currie ( 2011) has
argued that decorated hand axes of the Acheulian period, roughly 500,0 00– 750,000 ya, should
be considered art, or at least as aesthetic objects. If this view is correct, then our ancestors, such as
Homo heidelbergensis, engaged in art behaviors. Such decoration may have functioned as status
signaling, and Currie suggests sexual selection as an explanation for its persistence and diffusion.
Furthermore, Acheulian hand axes demonstrate symmetry. Kohn and Mithen ( 1999) explain the
emphasis on symmetry by sexual selection; whereas, Hodgson ( 2011) argues that this symmetry is
the b y- product of brain and perceptual development features.
There are objects whose dating is very early, presumably before the existence of Homo sapiens,
but their status as art or being symbolic, or even being artifacts in some cases, is questionable.
One example is the Venus of T an- Tan, which was discovered in Morocco in 1999. It is between
300,000 and 500,000 years old. Some scholars believe the object was not carved ( sculpted); instead,
it is interpreted to be a manuport. Shells decorated with abstract geometric patterns were
discovered at Trinil, Java. The early dating, 430,0 00– 530,000 ya, suggests that Homo erectus
modified the shells. If these marks are not considered art behaviors, then these markings are at least
proto-aesthetic behaviors ( Joordens et al., 2015).
The Berekhat Ram figurine was discovered in the Golan Heights, Israel, in 1981. It is a very
small lump of lava that resembles a woman. The object is approximately 230,000 years old. Some
scholars think that this is the earliest example of depictive art discovered thus far ( e.g., d’Errico
and Nowell, 2000), yet other scholars reject this hypothesis ( Coolidge and Wynn, 2018; 173).
Because of the early dating, this figurine also raises questions about the difference between depiction
and symbolism. It is possible that this figurine is depictive but not symbolic because it is not
clear that material symbolic culture was developed at that time.
Decorated ostrich shells have been found in Diepkloof Rock Shelter in South Africa, which are
dated from c. 65,000 to 55,000 ya. They are decorated with deliberate, varied geometric patterns.
In Klipdrift Shelter, also in South Africa, fragments of ostrich shells have engravings that may be
described as proto crosshatching. Ochre crayons have been discovered in Australia’s Arnhem Land
region, which are 61, 000– 45,000 years old. In addition, limestone rock stained with red ochre was
found in Carpenter’s Gap in the Kimberley region of Australia ( 50,0 00– 37,000 ya).
In Blombos Cave, South Africa, pieces of ochre and p rint- m aking toolkits were discovered.
Probably, these artifacts are the earliest evidence of planned a rt- making ( David, 2017; 124). These
artifacts are c. 105,0 00– 9 7,000 years old. Furthermore, this is the earliest evidence for shape being
decoupled from tools, i.e., non- functional objects ( Hodgson, 2011).
As of this writing, there is evidence that the earliest depictive rock art images arose in two
distant areas of the globe: Spain and France in Europe and the Indonesian part of Borneo.
Tobyn
De Marco
188
Archaeologists have found rock art images in the Sangkulirang- M angkalihat Peninsula in East Kalimantan, Borneo. A large reddish- o range painting of an animal and purple hand stencils has been dated to a minimum of 40,000 ya to a maximum of 51,800 ya ( Aubert et al., 2018). Some of the hand stencils are decorated with various shapes ( lines and dots). The Homo sapiens occupation of these caves in Borneo have been dated to between 40,000 and 50,000 ya.
In three caves ( El Castillo, Altamira, Tito Bustillo) in the Asturias and Cantabria regions of northwestern Spain, archaeologists discovered paintings, hand stencils, and engravings. The earli-est date acquired was c. 40,800 ya for a red circle in the El Castillo cave. Currently, there is some controversy over whether this cave art was made by Neanderthals or Homo sapiens ( Appenzeller, 2013; Hoffman, 2018a, Hoffmann, 2018b). If these dates for the art are correct, then these cave paintings would predate the arrival of Homo sapiens in Europe. In addition, R odriguez- Vidal et al. ( 2014) analyzed rock engraving in Gorham’s Cave in Gibraltar, which is dated to no later than c. 39,000 ya. They conclude that the marks, requiring prolonged, deliberate action, in a habitation area of the cave ( which suggests they were intended to be seen by others) are probably non- utilitarian, abstract pattern engravings by Neanderthals. There is no evidence that Homo sapiens had migrated to Gibraltar by this time. Although controversial, recently, the view of Neanderthals, who existed concurrently with Homo sapiens up to about 30,000 to 40,000 ya, is changing: Neanderthals may have been more cognitively similar to modern humans than previ-ously thought.
Chauvet cave art was discovered in 1994 in the Massif Central region of south- central France. The art seems to have been made in two phases: one dated from 37,000 to 33,500 ya, and the other dated from 31,000 to 29,000 ya. The art is remarkable because of the sophistication of the techniques used: shading, foregrounding to give a sense of depth, and rock scraping to give the black, red, and yellow pigments a white background for better clarity and effect. There are depictions of mammoths, rhinoceroses, and bison. At the Peche Merle cave in France, paintings were made c. 28,700 ya, during the Gravettian period, and demonstrates that human painters used the natural shapes of the rock to enhance the outlines of their depictions, which seems like a type of textural relief.
The first therianthrope discovered thus far was in Hohlenstein- Stadel Cave in southwestern Germany. The depictive statue is a lion’s head with a human body sculpted from woolly mam-moth ivory, and is c. 40,000 years old, probably made during the Aurignacian period of the Upper Paleolithic.
Currently, the oldest depiction of a human is the statuette “ Venus of Hohle Fels,” which is dated to 40,0 00– 35,000 ya. The representation of a woman was discovered in 2008 near Schelk-lingen, Germany. Discovered in the Czech Republic, the “ Venus of Dolní Vĕstonice” female figure statuette is the earliest evidence of ceramic use dated to c. 31,000 to 27,000 ya.
Many scholars interpret the current archaeological evidence to reveal that, although there seems to be a creative explosion in the Upper Paleolithic period as evidenced by cave paintings and figurines, art behaviors developed gradually, and are based upon brain systems that Homo sapiens share with ancestor species and perhaps other hominin species existing simultaneously with Homo sapiens.
3 Evolutionary Explanations of Art Behaviors
The evolutionary study of behavior can involve sociobiology, evolutionary psychology, ethol-ogy, evolutionary cognitive neuroscience, cognitive archaeology, behavioral ecology, behavioral neuroendocrinology, epigenetics, m ulti- level selection theories, developmental systems theory, cultural evolution, and cultural evolutionary psychology. These disciplines can contribute to the-ories of explanation of art behaviors that invoke adaptations, sexual selection, b y- products of
Evolution and the Fine Arts
189
natural selection, exaptations, cultural evolution ( c o- e volution), genetic drift, or some combination
thereof.
Below I briefly review some evolutionary explanations for art behaviors. It is important to note
that some of these theories are compatible with each other, and some theorists have views that
belong to more than one category ( e.g., Dissanayake, 1995; Brian Boyd, 2009; Dutton, 2009).
Generally, adaptationist accounts of any trait ( physical or behavioral) must demonstrate that the
trait is heritable or encoded in genes, be functional, contribute to fitness or reproductive success,
and not have been c o- opted for some other function ( which would make the trait an exaptation).
These explanations attempt to show how and for what the trait was selected. Although there are
adaptations without selection ( phenotypic plasticity) and selection without adaptations ( fecundity
selection), we will bracket those possibilities for our discussion here. Adaptationist explanations
for art behaviors differ by appealing to different ways in which art behaviors contribute to fitness
or reproductive success.
Ellen Dissanayake ( 1995) has put forward a “ make special” or elaboration theory, although her
theory also shares elements with some of the other adaptationist theories. Art behaviors contribute
to fitness by making our environments generally pleasant, which in turn contributes to the w ellbeing
of individuals and the community. Thus, Dissanayake’s theory implies both individual and
group selective advantage.
Some adaptationist theories argue that the function of art behaviors is social cohesion. Art
behaviors ease and promote social cooperation by providing cooperative group activities as practice
( since the stakes are low) and/ or help to regulate emotions, all of which contributes to fitness
in social animals. Carroll ( 2004, 2014a, 2014b) argues that art behaviors unite people through
emotional contagion. This theory assumes a view of inclusive fitness, which is the combination of
direct fitness ( reproduction) and indirect fitness, which is altruistic behavior toward conspecifics,
or group selection. Boyd ( 2009) argues that behaviors enhance humans’ ability to direct and detect
our conspecific’s attention, which may contribute to fitness in several ways.
Other theorists have argued that art behaviors contribute to fitness by helping humans to improve
some of their cognitive and perceptual abilities, including imagining alternative realities
( Allott, 1994; Boyd, 2009 and 2010). The problem here is that there are many other ways for
humans to sharpen their cognitive and perceptual skills. So, it is difficult to see how art behaviors
could contribute to fitness in this way. There are many adaptationist theories that claim that art
behaviors contribute to fitness by functioning as a relief of tension and anxiety, including sexual
and violent impulses ( Koch, 1984; Ralevski, 2000; Barnett, 2019).
Geoffrey Miller ( 2000) is one of the main proponents of a sexual selection explanation for
art behaviors. For Miller, art behaviors do not have any obvious, direct fitness advantage and
are practiced and engaged with at great cost to humans. Yet, humans universally engage in art
behaviors. Thus, Miller infers sexual selection is at work. Humans signal the capacity for reproductive
success through the demonstration of intelligence and skill exemplified in art behaviors.
Kohn and Mithen ( 1999) have argued that hand axes made by Homo erectus may have signaled
increased probability of reproductive success. There are many criticisms of sexual selection. First,
one problem is that the existence of sexual selection itself is being questioned ( Roughgarden et al.,
2015). Second, it is not clear that artists, or even those who spend much time as consumers of art,
are in fact more reproductively successful. In addition, there is a methodological concern: some
biologists and anthropologists believe that if a behavior is not the subject of natural selection, then
it must be the result of sexual selection. Given new evolutionary approaches, this assumption is
questionable, because with many new, increasingly plausible options available to theorists, the
choice between natural selection and sexually selected adaptations is a false dilemma.
One of those other options is identifying b y- products of adaptations. B y- products of natural selection
( or sexual selection), metaphorically called “ spandrels” by Stephen Jay Gould and Richard
Tobyn De Marco
190
C. Lewontin ( 1979), are traits and behaviors of organisms that are the result ( b y- p roduct) of the natural selection of a different trait or behavior. Thus, these by- product traits are not themselves adaptations, and not selected for, but arose as side effects of adaptations. Especially for depictive or representational drawing, painting, and sculpting, many prerequisite capacities are necessary. Painting, drawing, and sculpting may be by- p roducts of skills developed from over a million years of stone tool development and use, incipient symbolic cultural practices like body ornamentation, and status and/ or tribal membership indications by decorative clothes and tool decoration. Steven Pinker, for example, views art behaviors as b y- products of the adaptive behaviors of status seek-ing, taking pleasure in the experience of adapted environments, and design abilities for functional tools ( Pinker, 2003). By- product theory is very attractive for those who think that basic, survival behaviors and skills are adaptive and view art behaviors as scaffolding on those basic behaviors and traits but find it implausible that art behaviors themselves are adaptations. One potential problem with this view is that it quickly becomes too broad, thus risking vacuity: most of what humans do would be b y- p roduct behaviors, from automobile mechanics to writing letters. Another problem is the status of the b y- p roduct accounts. Many biologists and philosophers have offered skeptical critiques of b y- p roduct theory. Nonetheless, if it can be shown that art behaviors derive from spe-cific cognitive and perceptual adaptations, then the evidence for art behaviors being by- products is enhanced.
Another possibility is that art behaviors may be exaptations. Traits that were adaptive for one function but then are c o- o pted for a different function are exaptations ( e.g., birds’ feathers are adaptive for temperature control but were co- o pted for flight) ( Gould and Vrba, 1982). There can be both biological ( genetic) and cultural exaptations ( d’Errico and Colagè, 2018). For example, Nadal and Chatterjee ( 2018) argue that art is not an adaptation. Art behaviors are the result of human sensory motor, affective, and cognitive mechanisms that are adaptations for other func-tions. They cite as support for this view the fact that there are no specific brain areas dedicated to aesthetic behaviors yet discovered. Most directly, Skov and Nadal ( 2018; 700) suggest that “ The idea that art elicits a set of neural processes exclusive to art experiences must be laid to rest once and for all.” Art behaviors take advantage of a wide range of neural systems. These systems have been shown to be very flexible. Nadal and Chatterjee even suggest that the relaxation of selective pressures ( e.g., due to s elf- d omestication) may have been responsible for the cultural evolution of art behaviors. Their account attempts to address both the universality of art by appealing to the reuse of adaptive neural systems, and its immense diversity among global cultures by appealing to cultural evolution. Similarly, Agnati et al. ( 2015) have argued that art behaviors are an exaptation of the drive to communicate by symbols.
Cultural evolutionary theory ( or co- evolution) recognizes and emphasizes feedback loops be-tween genetic and cultural evolution ( sometimes called “ dual inheritance”): genes constrain and influence culture, and culture influences genetic evolution. There are different schools of cultural evolution [the so- called California ( e.g., Richerson and Boyd, 2005; Henrich, 2016) and “ Paris” ( e.g., Sperber, 1996; Morin, 2016) schools], and the most recent version is cultural evolutionary psychology ( or cognitive gadget theory) ( Heyes, 2018). Cognitive gadgets are cognitive mecha-nisms or ways of thinking that are cultural rather than instinctual, and thus are the result of cul-tural evolution not genetic evolution ( Heyes, 2018; 2). Cognitive gadget theory is selectionist but allows for autonomous cultural evolution, i.e., cultural variants can evolve without having influ-ence on genetic evolution. Whatever school of cultural evolution theory to which one subscribes, the general idea is that art behaviors are transmissible through various forms of social learning and perhaps individual learning. Art behaviors are part of the “ library,” or cumulative culture, that is transmitted through social and cultural learning. Furthermore, information in the “ library” is subject to similar selective mechanisms that operate on genes ( see Richerson and Boyd, 2005; Jablonska and Lamb, 2014; Hannon and Lewens, 2016; Boyd, 2018).
Evolution and the Fine Arts
191
It is a mistake to think that only adaptationist theories can account for the significance, meaning,
and value of art in human life; likewise, it is wrong to think that explaining art behaviors in
terms of their contribution to fitness somehow diminishes the value of art and exhausts its cultural
functions and meanings. In addition, the idea that art behaviors may be “ only” a b y- product of
selected for traits and behaviors does not imply anything negative about art’s status or value to
us. Explaining a phenomenon neither justifies nor abjures the phenomenon; however, explanations
may demystify the phenomenon by showing how it fits in with our best theories and tools
for understanding the world. To wit, cognitive archaeologists (inter alia) deem the evolutionary
explanations of art behaviors as crucially useful to understanding the modern human mind and
its origins ( Hodgson and Verpooten, 2015; Hodgson, 2011). Nonetheless, if these explanations
are not straightforwardly applicable to issues about the value and meaning of art, then there are
legitimate questions about their relevance to aesthetics and philosophy art.
4 Relevance to Aesthetics and Philosophy of Art
Besides their intrinsic intellectual interest, how ( and if ) evolutionary explanations of art behaviors
are relevant to issues, problems, and questions in aesthetics and the philosophy of art is a subset of
the m eta- philosophical issue of the role of the empirical sciences in philosophy generally, both in
the methods of philosophy and their role in philosophical theories. For example, could evolutionary
explanations of art behaviors contribute to the philosophical issues of the definition of art, or
the ontology of works of art? On the other hand, one should not discount the claim that the work
art historians and aestheticians do may be helpful to the sciences that study human behaviors,
especially art behaviors.
A helpful way of approaching these questions is to consider three possible positions ( Currie
et al., 2014; 10– 1 5). First, there is the Replacement Thesis, which holds that the natural and social
sciences should replace traditional philosophy and its methods. However, there still may be a minor
role for philosophy in doing some conceptual clean- u p work, which would serve the sciences
in doing their job better— philosophy as handmaiden to the sciences. On this view, philosophical
theories and problems would be replaced by scientific theories, including evolutionary explanations,
and/ or philosophical issues would be categorized as p seudo- p roblems. For example, it may
be the case that the question of the function of drawing, painting, and sculpting seizes to be a
philosophical issue because evolutionary explanations provide an adequate answer.
Second, there is the Supplement Thesis, which holds that scientific results and methods can
supplement philosophy by (inter alia) providing evidence that either supports or refutes theories
in aesthetics, give rise to new puzzles for philosophers to solve, and challenge us to see ways in
which our theories need to be revised. Even for those who think that philosophy is primarily
an analytic (a priori) enterprise, this does not rule out informed analysis, where this means being
empirically informed where appropriate and helpful in conceptual analysis. In addition, analytic
philosophy often relies upon intuitions as evidence, for example, as responses to thought experiments.
Recently, experimental philosophy has demonstrated many useful ( of course there are philosophers
who deny this) things about intuitions: that intuitions are less stable than philosophers
initially supposed, that they are more contextual and culture- b ased than previously thought, and
many others. Consequently, evolutionary explanations can account for why our intuitions are
what they are, or why they differ. This is useful when philosophers of art appeal to intuitions as
evidence in their arguments and may permit us to strengthen our arguments by recognizing both
the shortcomings and etiology of intuitions. In environmental aesthetics, there is a question of
whether the human appreciation of the aesthetic features of nature and human faces and bodies
gave rise to, or are necessary for, art behaviors, or vice versa. With respect to this issue, evolutionary
explanations may be dispositive.
Tobyn
De Marco
192
Finally, there is the Skeptical Thesis, which holds that empirical work should have no, or a very minimal, role to play in aesthetics. If many ( most?) issues in aesthetics and philosophy of art are normative, then these cannot be settled by scientific results and methods. One infers that some version of the naturalistic fallacy is being used to support such a claim. One problem here is that many philosophers hold that not all issues, questions, and problems in aesthetics are normative. For example, ontological issues can be viewed as attempting to discover or construct facts about the nature of art and works of art. But even if aesthetics has n on- n ormative issues, the Skeptical Thesis may still dismiss the relevance of scientific methods and facts on the ground that these issues are purely matters of conceptual analysis.
In contrast to the above positions, some philosophers have simply attempted to contribute to the biological theories, that is, provide possible hypotheses and evidence for evolutionary explana-tions for art behaviors. For example, Carroll ( 2014b) claims to be accounting for how art emerged, why it has persisted even under scarce circumstances, and its persistently important role in human history.
Often, strong views against scientific explanations for art behaviors ( and other phenomena) derive from questionable large- s cale assumptions, such as a simple- m inded scientism, or a radical reductionism. Neither scientism nor some oversimplified metaphysical reductionism needs to be accepted. Once those have been rejected, it is easier to discern a role for evolutionary theory in aesthetics and vice versa.
Some philosophers, like Alva Noë, argue that art itself is a way of understanding ourselves, not different in motivation from our engaging in the scientific investigation of ourselves ( Noë, 2015). To extend Noë’s argument, it may be that work in aesthetics and philosophy art, as well as art criticism and art history, may help cultural evolution theorists because one of the main advantages of cultural evolution is a recognition that evolution is always occurring, that it did not cease for Homo sapiens in the Paleolithic period. Given that philosophy of art is a way understanding the artistic and aesthetic cultures humans have formed and built, such analyses may contribute to cru-cial components in cultural evolution theory, such as means of social learning, types of cultural variants, and means of selective processes.
One compelling way of considering the relationship between, and relevance of, evolution and art behaviors is the following. If the cultural evolution ( or coevolution) account is even partly correct, then it is probable that our art behaviors and aesthetic sensibilities also gave rise to various capacities ( Noë calls them “ consciousnesses”) that in turn assisted humans in developing other, functional behaviors and cognitive mechanisms ( e.g., see Colagè and d’Errico, 2020). In other words, there are feedback loops not only between genes and culture ( as in niche construction) but also among behaviors and cognitive mechanisms themselves. As Peter Kivy ( 1991) argued, the aesthetic appreciation of the natural world and universe provides a deep and significant motiva-tion for investigating it scientifically, to seek understanding of its wonder and the source of our awe, and their underlying structure. Evolutionary biology and its related fields contribute to our understanding of our interest in the aesthetic features of the world and our artistic world- m aking, and our artistic w orld- making and its reception hones our cognitive and perceptual capacities to help us to become more astute at understanding those same capacities and behaviors. This suggests that biology and aesthetics are remarkably complementary to each other.
Bibliography
Agnati, Luigi F., Diego D. Guidolin, Kjell K. Fuxe. ( 2015) “ Art as a Human Instinct- L ike Behavior Emerg-ing from the Exaptation of the Communication Processes.” In Art, Aesthetics, and the Brain, pp. 426–450, ed. Joseph P. Huston, Marcos Nadal, Francisco Mora, Luigi F. Agnati and Camilo José C ela- Conde. New York: Oxford University Press.
Evolution
and the Fine Arts
193
Allott, Robin. ( 1994) “ The Pythagorean Perspective: The Arts and Sociobiology.” Journal of Social and Evolutionary
Systems, 17: 71–90.
Appenzeller, Tim. ( 2013) “ Old Masters: The Earliest Known Cave Paintings Fuel Arguments about whether
Neanderthals Were the Mental Equals of Modern Humans.” Nature, 497, no. 7449: 302– 304.
Aubert, M., et al. ( 2018) “ Paleolithic Art in Borneo.” Nature, 564: 254–257.
Barnett, Vincent. ( 2019) “ Art.” Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Psychological Science, ed. Todd K. Shackelford and
Viviana A. Weeks- Shackelford. Springer. First online February 19, 2019.
Boyd, Brian. ( 2009) On the Origin of Stories: Evolution, Cognition, and Fiction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Boyd, Brian, Joseph Carroll, and Jonathan Gottschall, eds. ( 2010) Evolution, Literature, and Film: A Reader.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Boyd, Robert. ( 2018) A Different Kind of Animal: How Culture Transformed Our Species. The University Center
for Human Values Series. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Carroll, Noël. ( 2004) “ Art and Human Nature.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 62, no. 2 ( Spring):
95–107.
Carroll, Noël. ( 2014a) “ Aesthetics, Art, and Biology.” Philosophy and Literature, 38, no. 2 ( October):
578–586.
Carroll, Noël. ( 2014b) “ The Arts, Emotion, and Evolution.” In Aesthetics and the Sciences of Mind, pp. 159–
180, ed. Greg Currie, Matthew Kieran, Aaron Meskin and Jon Robson. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Chatterjee, Anjan. (2014) The Aesthetic Brian: How We Evolved to Desire Beauty and Art. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Colagè, Ivan, and Francesco d’Errico. ( 2020) “ Culture: The Driving Force of Human Cognition.” Topics in
Cognitive Science, 12, no. 2: 1– 19.
Coolidge, Frederick L., and Thomas Wynn. ( 2018) The Rise of Homo sapiens: The Evolution of Modern Thinking.
Second Edition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cosmides, Leda, and John Tooby. ( 1992) “ Cognitive Adaptations for Social Exchange.” The Adapted Mind:
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, p p. 163– 2 28. ed. J. H. Barkow, Leda Cosmides and
John Tooby. New York: Oxford University Press.
Currie, Gregory. ( 2011) “ The Master of the Masek Beds: Handaxes, Art, and the Minds of Early Humans.”
The Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology, p p. 9– 3 1, ed. Elisabeth Shellekens and Peter Goldie. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Currie, Gregory, et al. ( 2014) “ Introduction.” In Aesthetics and the Sciences of Mind, pp. 1–17, ed. Gregory
Currie, Matthew Kieran, Aaron Meskin, and Jon Robson. New York: Oxford University Press.
David, Bruno. ( 2017) Cave Art. Thames and Hudson World of Art Series. London: Thames and Hudson.
Davies, Stephen. ( 2012) The Artful Species. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dennett, Daniel C. ( 2017) From Bacteria to Bach and Back: The Evolution of Minds. New York: W.W. Norton.
d’Errico, Francesco, and Ivan Colagè. ( 2018) “ Cultural Exaptation and Cultural Neural Reuse: A Mechanism
for the Emergence of Modern Culture and Behavior.” Biological Theory, 13: 213–227.
d’Errico, Francesco, and April Nowell. ( 2000) “ A New Look at the Berekhat Ram Figurine: Implications
for the Origins of Symbolism.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal, no. 1: 123–167.
Dissanayake, Ellen. ( 1995) Homo Aestheticus: Where Arts Comes from and Why. Seattle: University of Washington
Press.
Dutton, Denis. ( 2009) The Art Instinct: Beauty, Pleasure, and Human Evolution. New York: Bloomsbury.
Gottschall, Jonathan. ( 2012) The Storytelling Animal: How Stories Make Us Human. New York: Mariner
Books.
Gottschall, Jonathan, and David Sloane Wilson, eds. ( 2005) The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of
Narrative. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Gould, Stephen Jay, and Richard C. Lewontin. ( 1979) “ The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian
Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B 205,
no. 1161: 581–598.
Gould, Stephen Jay, and Elisabeth S. Vrba. ( 1982) “ Exaptation— A Missing Term in the Science of Form.”
Paleobiology, 8 (Winter): 4–15.
Hannon, Elizabeth, and Tim Lewens. ( 2016) “ Cultural Evolution”. In How Evolution Shapes Our Lives: Essays
on Biology and Society, p p. 341– 3 45, ed. Jonathan B. Losos and Richard E. Lenski. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Henrich, Joseph. ( 2016) The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution, Domesticating Our
Species, and Making Us Smarter. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tobyn
De Marco
194
Heyes, Cecilia. ( 2018) Cognitive Gadgets: The Cultural Evolution of Thinking. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, Harvard University Press.
Hodgson, Derek. ( 2011) “ The First Appearance of Symmetry in the Human Lineage: Where Perception Meets Art.” Symmetry, 3: 37–53.
Hodgson, Derek, and Jan Verpooten. ( 2015) “ The Evolutionary Significance of the Arts: Exploring the By- p roduct Hypothesis in the Context of Ritual, Precursors, and Cultural Evolution.” Biological Theory, 10:73–85.
Hoffman, D. L., et al. ( 2018a) “ U- Th Dating of Carbonate Crusts Reveals Neandertal Origin of Iberian Cave Art.” Science,359 (February 23): 912–915.
Hoffmann, Dirk L., D. E. Angelucci, V. Villaverde, J. Zapata, and J. Zilhão. ( 2018b) “ Symbolic Use of Marine Shells and Mineral Pigments by Iberian Neandertals 115,000 Years Ago.” Science Advances, 4: eaar5255.
Høgh-Olesen, Henrik. (2019) The Aesthetic Animal. New York: Oxford University Press.
Honing, Henkjan, ed. ( 2018) The Origins of Musicality. Foreword by W. Tecumseh Fitch. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Jablonska, Eva, and Marion J. Lamb. ( 2014) Evolution in Four Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in the History of Life. Revised Edition. Life and Mind: Philosophical Issues in Biology and Psychology Series. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Joordens, Josephine C. A., et al. ( 2015) “ Homo erectus at Trinil on Java used Shells for Tool Production and Engraving.” Nature,518 (February 12): 228–231.
Kivy, Peter. ( 1991) “ Science and Aesthetic Appreciation.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy,XVI:180–195.
Koch, Walter A. ( 1984) “ Art: Biogenesis and Semiogensis.” Semiotica,49:283–304.
Kohn, Marek, and Steven Mithen. ( 1999) “ Handaxes: Products of Sexual Selection?” Antiquity, 73, no. 281: 518–526.
Miller, Geoffrey F. ( 2000) The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature. New York: Doubleday.
Mithen, Steven. ( 1996) The Prehistory of the Mind: The Cognitive Origins of Art, Religion and Science. London: Thames and Hudson.
Mithen, Steven. ( 2005) The Singing Neanderthals: The Origins of Music, Language, Mind and Body. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Morley, Iain. ( 2013) The Prehistory of Music: Human Evolution, Archaeology, and the Origins of Musicality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Morin, Olivier. ( 2016) How Traditions Live and Die. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nadal, Marcos, Anjan Chatterjee. ( 2019) “ Neuroaesthetics and Art’s Diversity and Universality.” Cognitive Science, 10: e 1487.
Noë, Alva. ( 2015) Strange Tools: Art and Human Nature. New York: Hill and Wang.
Overmann, Karenleigh A., and Frederick L. Coolidge, eds. ( 2019) Squeezing Minds from Stones: Cognitive Archaeology and the Evolution of the Human Mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Patel, Aniruddh. ( 2007) Music, Language, and the Brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pinker, Steven. ( 2003) Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. New York: Penguin.
Prum, Richard O. ( 2017) The Evolution of Beauty: How Darwin’s Forgotten Theory of Mate Choice Shapes the Animal World—And Us. New York: Anchor Books.
Ralevski, Elizabeth. ( 2000) “ Aesthetics and Art from an Evolutionary Perspective.” Evolution and Cognition, 6, no. 1: 84–103.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. ( 2005) Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rodriguez- V idal, Joaquin, et al. ( 2014) “ A Rock Engraving Made by Neanderthals in Gibraltar.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111, no. 37 ( September 16): 1 3301– 1 3306.
Roughgarden, Joan, Elizabeth A dkins- Regan, Erol Akcay, Jeremy Chase Crawford, Raghavendra Gadag-kar, Simon C. Griffith, Camilla A. Hinde, Thierry Hoquet, Cailin O’Connor, Zofia M. Prokop, Rich-ard O. Prum, Sharoni Shafir, Samuel S. Sno, Daniel Taylor, Jeremy Van Cleve, and Michael Weisberg ( 2015) “ Sexual Selection Studies: A NESCent Catalyst Meeting.” 1– 15. Durham, NC: National Evolu-tionarySynthesisCenter.http://dx.doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.680v3
Skov, Martin, and Marcos Nadal. ( 2018) “ Art Is Not Special: An Assault on the Last Lines of Defense against the Naturalization of the Human Mind.” Reviews in Neuroscience, 29, no. 6: 6 99– 702.
Sperber, Dan. ( 1996) Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Tooby, John, and Cosmides Leda. ( 2001). “ Does Beauty Build Adapted Minds? SubStance,30, no. 1–2: 6–27.
Wilson, Edward O. ( 2017) The Origins of Creativity. New York: Liveright, W.W. Norton.
Evolution
and the Fine Arts
195
Further Reading
Davies, Stephen. ( 2018) “ Evolution, Aesthetics, and Art: An Overview.” The Routledge Handbook to Evolution
and Philosophy, p p. 4 40– 455, ed. Richard Joyce. New York: Routledge.
Nadal, Marcos, and Gerardo Gómez- Puerto. ( 2014) “ Evolutionary Approaches to Art and Aesthetics.” The
Cambridge Handbook of the Psychology of Aesthetics and the Arts, p p. 167– 194, ed. Pablo P. L. Tinio and Jeffrey
K. Smith. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Seghers, Eveline. ( 2015) “ The Artful Mind: A Critical Review of the Evolutionary Psychological Study of
Art.” British Journal of Aesthetics, 55, no. 2 ( April): 225– 248.
196 DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-25
20
COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY
William P. Seeley
Ludwig Wittgenstein is said to have said that psychology was the wrong lens to use if you were
looking to capture the defining elements of art.
35. People often say that aesthetics is a branch of psychology. The idea is that once we are
more advanced, everything – all the mysteries of art – will be understood by psychological
experiments. Exceedingly stupid as the idea is, this is it.
36. Aesthetic questions have nothing to do with psychological experiments, but are answered
in an entirely different way.
(Wittgenstein, 1938/1966: 17)
A generation later, George Dickie (1962) recapitulated Wittgenstein’s message. He wrote that asking
psychologists about the nature of art was like asking toddlers about the rules governing good
grammar. Alva Noë (2015) has argued more recently that research in neuroscience and related
areas of cognitive science, despite the social cachet of this contemporary technophila, has failed to
reveal anything interesting about art … and never will.
My goal in this chapter is to challenge these views. I will argue that cognitive psychology is a
natural lens for understanding art. Artworks are communicative events. They afford a communicative
exchange between artists and consumers. They are artifacts designed to communicate
(sometimes we say express) a point, purpose, or meaning. The very possibility of art, therefore,
depends upon the firm foundation of our human cognitive capacities. Of course none of this
means that the mysteries of art can be explained away by the methods of psychology. Psychology
isn’t in the ontological business of reduction and replacement. That is a philosopher’s hat.
Psychologists want to know how things work. These data can be useful. They can help shape
answers to complicated theoretical questions about familiar behaviors like those associated with
artistic practice.
1 Skepticism about Psychology of Art
What is cognitive psychology? Well. Psychology is the scientific study of mind and behavior.
Cognitive psychology is therefore the study of cognitive behavior. More concretely, it is the
scientific study of the psychological underpinnings of cognition. So, what is cognition? It is the
process of acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience, and the senses.
The psychological underpinnings of cognition include attention, perception, language, memory,
Cognitive Psychology
197
reasoning, problem-solving, and creativity. Cognitive psychology is the scientific study of the role
these processes play in the acquisition and development of knowledge and understanding.
I have argued elsewhere that cognitive science and art are natural bedfellows (Seeley, 2020).
The same can be said for cognitive psychology. Cognitive psychology, like its more interdisciplinary
cousin cognitive science, is the scientific study of the way organisms acquire information from
their environment and use it in the service of behavior. It is a method for studying how intelligent
organisms acquire, represent, manipulate, and use information in the service of knowledge, understanding,
and the everyday behaviors that support their flourishing and survival. Artworks are
communicative devices. They are, as mentioned above, artifacts intentionally designed to express
(or communicate) their content. An understanding of art should start with an understanding of
how this might work. It should include an explanation of how consumers acquire that subset of
information from an artwork that will be sufficient to enable them to recover its point, purpose, or
meaning. Why? We might argue everything turns on it. Explanations of how consumers recover
information from the perceptible surface of a painting or sculpture (or any other kind of artwork
for that matter) articulate strong constraints on exactly what can and can’t be expressed in this
kind of a communicative exchange and so on the adequacy of any theory of art.
Cognitive psychology is a science that is well-positioned to explain how all of this might work.
Of course once we adopt this lens it should be obvious that one-size-fits-all explanations are illsuited
to the arts. Artworks come in a variety of media. The underlying story of our engagement
with artworks, whatever it might be, will need to exhibit the flexibility necessary to accommodate
this variance.
So why be skeptical about psychology of art? The easiest place to look is what might be called
the common perceptual mechanisms argument. Research in psychology of art draws on everyday perceptual
and cognitive processes. This is a significant strength. Empirical aesthetics eschews mystical
just-so stories derived from assumptions about brute aesthetic capacities or ineffable aesthetic
properties. But it is also the source of a significant problem.
Philosophical theories of art are often couched as definitions of art. Why? Theories of art ought
to be able to disambiguate their subject, art, from other things. They ought to help us articulate
our understanding of the category “art”. They should point towards the categorially salient artistic
features of works and use them to articulate a procedure for sorting artworks from other
non-art artifacts. This project has been admittedly short on success stories. It has proven easier
to recognize local evaluative criteria that underwrite art critical judgments about sub-classes of
artworks than to uncover more global, general defining ontological constraints on what counts
as artistic practice. It would seem that the broad variance observed among different types of artworks
renders the category ‘art’ immune to definition. Nonetheless, consumers are quite adept
at ontological and appreciative judgments about artworks. Theories of art should ideally sketch a
set of heuristic criteria to explain these capacities (Carroll, 1992). They should provide a means to
explain why we treat some preferential range of artifacts as artworks (see Danto, 2000).
The trouble for empirical aesthetics is that the cognitive processes appealed to in explanations
of artistic practices are ordinary, everyday, garden-variety cognitive processes. We don’t perceive
an artwork any differently than we perceive a street sign or a busy barnyard afternoon. The same
range of cognitive processes is involved in both cases. Cognitive psychology therefore fails to
articulate what is unique about artworks. Seen through its lens, artworks are identical to other
quotidian perceptible artifacts. Cognitive psychology doesn’t provide any purchase in explaining
art. The hard work of identifying the artworks and justifying associated category judgments has
to be done in advance using the lens of art criticism, art history, or philosophy of art. Our understanding
of art doesn’t emerge from the work of cognitive psychologists. And herein lies the rub.
The real hard explanatory work involved in understanding art is antecedently presupposed by
psychology of art. Or so the argument goes.
William P. Seeley
198
It is important to note that researchers can simply bite the bullet and accept this objection. It is a
well-worn strategy within empirical aesthetics to explain the cognitive processes that underwrite
consumer interactions with canonical, art critically established artworks. The rationale behind
this research strategy is most transparent in explanations of aesthetic and expressionist artworks.
These are works intentionally designed to exhibit or betray aesthetic or emotionally expressive
features. These are their artistically salient features. The thought is that if one were to uncover
causal-psychological mechanisms that could explain how a work was designed to express its aesthetic
or affective content, one would have explained that artwork. This may be a nice strategy for
explaining how an artwork works, how consumers perceive recognize, and respond to some set
of well-established artistically salient attributes of historically valued artworks. However, it is not
clear that this is a sound strategy for understanding an artwork qua an artwork. What is missing is
a psychological explanation of what is artistically unique about those features. Short that, all that
has been established is how these works operate as perceptual stimuli.
Imagine that one thought that the dynamics of the wind-blown foliage in an impressionist
painting by Monet were among its artistically important aesthetic features. One might undertake
to explain how the manipulation of coarse brushstrokes contributed to the spatial frequency information
in the painting. One might then undertake to explain how the perceptual dynamics of the
painting emerged from the structure of this spatial frequency information, e.g., as the consequence
of illusory feature conjunctions or a McKay effect (see Livingstone, 2002; Seeley, 2020). One
might produce a fascinating perceptual explanation of the painting this way. But that explanation
would not suffice to disambiguate the artwork from any other object or surface in the environment
sufficiently structured to induce illusory feature conjunctions or a McKay illusion. It would therefore
not suffice as an explanation of the artistic salience of the perceptual dynamics of the work
(nor, for analogous reasons, would it necessarily be an explanation of the putative aesthetic quality
of these perceptual dynamics). What is needed is a tie-in between these formal-compositional
aspects of a work and its point, purpose, or meaning. What is needed is an explanation of why it
would have been artistically salient for Monet to have rendered his subject matter in that particular
way, perhaps as an attempt to capture the dynamics of a pedestrian moment in light.1
Explanations of the latter sort are normative explanations. They refer to normative conventions
as causes, as reasons for someone having behaved in one way or another. What it is to explain art,
on this kind of account, is to explain why it is appropriate to appreciate a particular type of work
made in a particular way given the normative conventions governing best practices within that
category of art. Normative explanations of art refer to the fit between artworks and antecedently
established normative conventions for artistic practice. The purpose of an explanation of art, on
this account, is to render artworks intelligible, to explain why an artist rendered their subject
matter in a particular way.
Skepticism about psychology of art is born of an assumption that the questions that matter for
explanations of art are normative questions about the nature of artistic appreciation. Cognitive
psychology can explain how we recognize the identities of artworks and how we categorize them
as artworks produced by different artists who belonged to different schools, movements, or genre
categories that are tagged to different historical epochs. It can explain the origins of our subjective
preferences for different kinds of artworks and show how these preferences are expressed, e.g., as
affectively nuanced aesthetic responses. It can even explain the underlying cognitive etiology of
our appreciative judgments by explaining how we associate artworks with different sets of normative
conventions. However, the psychological processes that underwrite these artistic practices
are the same ones that underwrite all of our cognitive behaviors. They explain the etiology of
both appreciative judgments that are art critically apt and those that are not appropriate. They
apply equally in explanations of preferences for artworks that are fit to the normative conventions
governing the production of artworks in a category and those that don’t. And they explain our
Cognitive Psychology
199
capacity to recognize, understand, and appreciate non-art artifacts like editorial cartoons and
journalistic photographs, and billboards. They even explain our appreciation of shop tools and
kitchen appliances, e.g., perceived differences in the quality of Craftsmen and Milwaukee handheld
power drills or Mr. Coffee coffee makers and the Nespresso machine next to the convection
oven on my counter. Cognitive psychology, as a consequence, fails as a lens to explain what is
artistically unique about our interactions with artworks. It fails to provide leverage in explanations
of the art of those artifacts we categorize as artworks.
We can call this the normative dimensions of appreciation argument. It explains the underlying force
of the common perceptual mechanisms argument. Together the two arguments articulate what
we might call the puzzle of locating art (Noë, 2015; Seeley, 2020). The challenge for psychology of
art, like any explanatory endeavor, is to identify the appropriate target explananda. Skeptics like
Wittgenstein, Dickie, and Noë argue that psychology of art has missed the mark. It has failed
to locate art. But this is no surprise. They weren’t looking for it. They aren’t really interested in
explaining art. What they are after instead is an understanding of how consumers perceive, recognize,
and exhibit preferences for the contents of a range of expressive and representational artifacts
that include artworks.
Researchers in empirical aesthetics have a counterargument. The folk psychological intuition
about artworks is that they are and have always been aesthetic objects. They are artifacts intentionally
designed to induce aesthetic experiences, to trigger aesthetic responses in consumers that
carry information about their artistically salient aesthetic content. Aesthetic responses are psychological
responses, affectively nuanced perceptual and cognitive responses. If the folk psychological
intuition is correct, an explanation of these psychological responses should also explain how we
recognize, understand, and appreciate art.
This is not the place for a critical analysis of aesthetic intuitions about art. It is certainly the case
that many artworks exhibit artistically salient aesthetic properties. It is also likely that there is a
broad preference for these kinds of artworks, at least in western European communities. The goal
of any critical analysis of the role of aesthetics in art, despite the deep anti-aesthetic vein in the
last century of contemporary art, should be to accommodate this fact. This challenge can be met.
Artworks are, as discussed above, acts of communication. The end goal of acts of communication
is understanding. We may exhibit subjective aesthetic preferences for some communicative
strategies as opposed to others. But these preferences are more often than not beside the point. I
may prefer a Downeast drawl or a Boston accent to its New York and midwestern cousins. But
the auditory inflection of the range of phonemes used in these utterances doesn’t ordinarily influence
the information they carry and convey. Of course it might. Accents can be used, within the
context a shared body of background information, to infuse dialect with rich sense of place that is
replete with narratively salient semantic associations. This is the clue we need to understand the
role of aesthetics in art. The aesthetic is a tool artists often deploy to render the content of a work.
The aesthetic is a means to draw attention to artistically salient aspects of a work and to articulate
the information that work carries and communicates. It is meaningful, against the backdrop of
European history, to render an alpine mountain landscape as beautiful as opposed to terrifying (or
to render a working farm landscape as cultivated and utilitarian as opposed to wild and natural).
Artists choose how to render the subjects of their works. Artworks carry and communicate information
associated with these choices. The aesthetic is just one among many tools available to
artists to facilitate communication in these contexts.
Where does this leave us? The puzzle of locating art suggests that psychology of art has been
looking in the wrong place. The place to look for art is in the communicative exchange between
artists and consumers. Art is not located in our affective, perceptual, or cognitive responses to art
per se. Our understanding of art might nonetheless be illuminated by an understanding of the role
those processes play in that communicative exchange.
William P. Seeley
200
2 Art and Understanding
Artistic appreciation is a product of evaluative judgments about artworks. The range of target
questions associated with appreciation should be familiar by now. Has the work executed well or
poorly? Is its content, is the way its subject matter was rendered, apt to its point, purpose, or meaning?
Does the work exhibit a good fit to the normative conventions governing artistic production
in the appropriate categories of art? All of these questions are questions about what an artist did.
They are questions about the choices an artist made when he or she set out to construct a work in
a recognizable category of art with a recognizable point, purpose, or meaning (even if the purpose
of a work was merely to render a realistic and aesthetically striking representation of its subject).
The goal of appreciative judgments is to articulate some set of normatively regulated preferences
for different kinds of artworks. We value artworks. These values are reflected in the range
of culturally organized (biased or constrained) preferences associated with different categories of
art. Cognitive psychology is an odd place to look for this aspect of art. We don’t ordinarily look
to cognitive psychology for an understanding of the contents of our values. There is, however, another
sense of appreciation. Appreciative judgments are judgments about how something has been
done. Appreciation in this sense is tied to understanding (Carroll, 1999). What it is to appreciate
a Milwaukee hand-held power drill is to understand why it is designed the way it is, what choices
were made in the design and why, or how those choices are fit to the purpose of a hand-held
power drill. We appreciate the drill when we understand why it was designed the way it was. We
value it for the fit exhibited between its design and the point or purpose of the choices made by
an engineer or industrial designer.
Noël Carroll’s (1999) functional account of artistic form can be used to help articulate what this
might mean for understanding art. Functional accounts of artistic form can be understood in
contrast with descriptive accounts. A descriptive account of form is just that, a description of all
of the formal elements and observable compositional relations exhibited by a work. These include,
for instance, everything from the hue, tone, size, shape, and relative locations of all of the
brushstrokes in a painting to the placement, relative scale, and relations among the elements of the
recognizable parts of their represented subject. There is a lot, perhaps an intractably large amount,
of information to sort through in a descriptive account of form. Luckily what we are interested
in when we engage with an artwork isn’t a descriptive account of form (although a conservator
responsible for the collection at a major museum might be). What an ordinary consumer wants
to know is how some subset of these formal and compositional elements were organized to communicate
the point, purpose, or meaning of the work. We can call this a functional account of
artistic form. The subset of formal and compositional relations constitutive of the functional form
of a work reflects the range of communicative choices an artist made in deciding how to render
its subject matter.
How does a consumer access the functional form of an artwork? The first step is to recognize
any salient similarities between the target artwork and some range of others. These similarities
facilitate categorizing a work appropriately, or perceptually recognizing its identity as a member
of some range of salient categories of art. This is a volume about painting and sculpture. We can
confine our discussion to the visual arts. But the point generalizes to all types of artworks from
novels, poems, and novellas to conceptually driven performance art. When we recognize that an
artwork belongs to one category or another we unlock a recipe of normative conventions that
guide and constrain the way we attend to its perceptible surface. The concepts that encode our
understanding of categories of art function as perceptual filters that direct attention and help us
to recognize and understand the artistically salient features of a work. In short, we deploy our
commonsense understanding of the communicative practices associated with different categories
Cognitive Psychology
201
of art to focus attention on the artistically salient attributes of the work, the attributes that carry
information about its artistically salient point, purpose, or meaning.
Categories of art are encoded in our understanding of the productive and evaluative conventions
governing artistic practices for a range of artworks within an artworld community. We
might schematically explain the relationship between productive and evaluative conventions as
follows. Artists develop their own unique productive strategies and stylistic vocabularies through
trial and error with artistic styles and methods inherited from some chosen set of their precursors.
Constraints on this process include the nature of the medium and the relative communicative
success of these productive strategies in practice. Communicative success is, in turn, constrained
by artistic preferences that have been shaped by the history of artistic practice within that community,
by a shared background knowledge of the existing artistic styles and methods that underwrite
artistic expression. The evaluative conventions that govern our appreciative practices reflect our
understanding of those normative productive conventions artists have settled on as successful in
the context of their communicative practices. The normative productive and evaluative conventions
constitutive of categories of art, therefore, emerge and evolve together via a back-and-forth
communicative exchange.
So, how does a consumer access the functional form of an artwork? They apply the resources
available to them through their understanding of categories of art. They use their shared background
knowledge of categories of art to recognize and evaluate productive stylistic choices reflected
in the way the artist has rendered the subject of the work. This process, in turn, enables
them to piece together the point, purpose, or meaning of the work. What it is to appreciate an
artwork is, therefore, to render it intelligible by tying it into a narrative about the history of artistic
communicative practices.
It is at precisely this point that the normative dimensions of appreciation argument rears its head
again. What it is to appreciate an artwork is to render it intelligible. What it is to render an artwork
intelligible is to locate it in a narrative about the history of artistic practice by associating it with some
range of categories of art. Locating an artwork enables us to recognize and interpret the choices an
artist made, what it meant to render the subject of a work in that particular way in that particular
context. We cannot render a work intelligible by looking at it in isolation. The skeptic argues that
this entails that psychology is the wrong lens to use to look to locate art. The causal-psychological
lens of cognitive psychology is directed at those internal psychological processes that underwrite
our individual, subjective interactions with particular, individual artworks at a particular, isolated
moment in time. Artistic explanations lie in the way what has been perceived in a work is subsequently
tied into the history of artist practice. The identity of an artwork lies in its relationship to
the norms and values constitutive of different categories of art. The scope of cognitive psychology,
so the argument goes, is too narrow to encompass this kind of normative explanation.
3 Why Shouldn’t We Be Skeptical about Psychology of Art?
The puzzle of locating art is a genuine challenge for psychology of art. But it is a challenge that
can be met. The solution is already suggested in the skeptical arguments rehearsed in the paragraphs
above. Let’s accept for now that cognitive psychology cannot help explain the productive
and evaluative norms constitutive of categories of art (although I am skeptical about this claim).
It can nonetheless contribute to explanations of role these normative conventions play in artistic
practice, how they are used to shape our everyday interactions with artworks, how the artistically
salient content of a work has been rendered and expressed. These sorts of explanations can, in
turn, serve as strong constraints on our understanding of the nature of categories of art themselves.
William P. Seeley
202
The target of philosophical skepticism about psychology of art is a narrow, methodological
divide that emerged between empirical and philosophical aesthetics in the mid-20th century.
The roots of this divide can be traced back through David Berlyne (1971) to Gustav Fechner
(1876/1978) and the origins of psychology as a discipline in the 19th century. The enduring fracas
is largely a disagreement about evidence. Philosophical aesthetics looks to the judgments of expert
artists, art historians, and critics for evidence about the nature of art. Researchers in empirical
aesthetics have argued that there is a risk that small samples of individual expert judgments of taste
like these might encode subjective biases that mask the real identity of art. Sometimes a charge
of elitism is levied in these contexts. But the real trouble is the sample size. Empirical aesthetics
proposes that researchers should look to the physiological responses and explicit preference judgments
of large samples of ordinary folks instead. They suggest we replace subjective measures of
the individual tastes of experts with objective measures of the behaviors of whole communities.
This is a sensible request.
Philosophers have countered that the average behaviors of ordinary perceivers and cogniziers
are not the right place to look for art. We might learn interesting things about the (aesthetic or
artistic) preferences of average viewers this way. But these viewers need not necessarily have any
understanding of the normative conventions that guide artistic production and appreciation in
artworld contexts. They may well lack knowledge of the categories of art that guides artworld
communities. If so their genuine judgments of taste will miss the mark. Dickie, as mentioned
above, argued that studying art this way was analogous to a linguist looking for the nature of some
natural language in the grammatical judgments of toddlers. Of course we often learn very surprising
things about the shortcomings of our explicit conscious understanding of ourselves when we
step into the realm of experimental psychology. We might, for instance, discover that the average
perceiver prefers mass produced hotel room landscapes to critically acclaimed contemporary conceptual
installation art.
The concerns raised on both sides of this methodological divide are valid and important. But I
would suggest that the exchange is a red herring. I recall a recent conversation in which a graduate
student in empirical aesthetics argued that it was perfectly valid to appreciate a painting (whether
it was a Vermeer, a Kinkade, or a hotel room landscape) just because one was struck by its unique
hue of blue. Of course they were correct. The folk view of art is that artworks are written in a
perceptually universal, affectively inflected vocabulary of aesthetics. This folk view is underwritten
by a generic aesthetic category of art. The right way to interact with artworks that fall within
this category is to open your mind and attend to the way the work strikes you perceptually. The
methods of empirical aesthetics are well suited to explore the nature of our cognitive interactions
with these kinds of artworks. But there are many other categories of art. Worse, I’d bet that there
are normative biases unique to particular aesthetic communities of ordinary viewers that define a
broad range of categorial variance within folk-aesthetic views of art themselves.
The list of potential categories of art is long. There is contemporary art, minimalism and early
conceptual art, feminist and Marxist conceptual art, the neo-expressionism and postmodernist
neo-geo art of the 1980s, modernism, dada, surrealism, impressionism, expressionism, Hudson
River landscape painting, mannerism, pastoralism, etc. Each of these categories of art is defined by
its own normative productive and evaluative conventions. These normative conventions, in turn,
define categorially unique sets of artistically salient diagnostic features or perceptible sets of defining
features that allow a consumer to recognize that a work was intentionally produced as a member
of one category or another (see Schyns, 1998).
The artistically salient diagnostic features exhibited in a work reveal the categorial intentions of
the artist. They don’t tell us how to interpret the point, purpose, or meaning of a work per se.
Rather they show us that we are to understand the work as having been intended to be interpreted
under a certain rubric, a recipe for recognizing, understanding, and appreciating the content of
Cognitive Psychology
203
the work particular to a particular category of art. We are supposed to notice the coarse brushstrokes
of impressionist paintings, the skew scale of Hudson River school mountain landscapes,
and the impossible muscular flexion of Rodin’s sculpted figures. We are not supposed to be distracted
by how far these categorically salient aspects of those artworks fall astray of realism. Rather
we are supposed to recognize that they are canonical expressive devices designed to communicate
something about the dynamics of a pedestrian snapshot of an ordinary landscape, the grandeur of
the nature world, and the dynamic, animate, emotionally expressive qualities of human behaviors
respectively.
Artworks are communicative devices. They are attentional engines. They are artifacts that
instruct us how to attend to their perceptible surfaces in order to recover their artistic point,
purpose, or meaning (Carroll & Seeley, 2013). Any comprehensive understanding of art should
include an understanding of how artworks work in this regard. The methods of cognitive psychology,
whether construed broadly to include psychophysiology and neuroscience or not, are ideally
suited to the task. Evidence suggests, for instance, that memory and attention conspire to shape
the content of perception. Phillipe Schyns (1998) has explored interconnections between research
on categorization and perceptual recognition that can help illuminate how artists encode their
categorial intentions in the perceptible surfaces of artworks. Biased competition theories of selective
attention suggest that the categorization processes involved in perceptual recognition enhance
the sensory encoding of diagnostic features at the expense of others (Desimone & Duncan, 1995;
Kastner, 2004). This kind of research can help us understand how artists use artworks to direct
attention and convey the particular content of their works. Studies of the differences between cognitive
influences on spatial, feature, and category-based attention can help further articulate our
understanding of these matters (Wolfe, 1994; Peelen & Kastner, 2014). Bence Nanay has argued,
in a related vein, that differences between distributed and focused attention can help us articulate
the nature of aesthetic expression, experience, and understanding (Nanay, 2016).
4 Cognitive Psychology and Art
Categorization is a psychological process that is central to this model for understanding the nature
of art. The nature of art lies in the defining characteristics of different categories of art. Our
understanding of art is revealed in the cognitive behaviors that underwrite a capacity to deploy
categories of art in perceptual recognition, just as our understanding of other things is revealed in
our capacity to deploy the appropriate categories in more pedestrian perceptual contexts. What
are categories of art? Discussions of categories go hand in hand with discussions of the concepts we
use to encode our understanding of them in memory (Murphy, 2002). Our understanding of the
nature of categories is encoded in the nature (structure) of the concepts we use to represent them.
The question, “What are categories of art?” might well be reframed as “What is the appropriate
theory of concepts for categories of art?” (see Seeley, 2020).
Perceptual categories of art would seem to be well-matched to a prototype theory of concepts.
Prototype theories define concepts relative to a notion of typicality. Objects, events, and actions
are categorized relative to their resemblance to some set of canonical or prototypical features
common to members of that category. A painting can be categorized an impressionist painting, on
this account, if it exhibits the right prototypical features, e.g. coarse brushstrokes that exhibit the
dynamics of an ordinary landscape. Kendall Walton’s (1970) discussion of categories of art bears
some resemblance to a prototype theory of concepts.
Morris Weitz (1956) argued that the only thread that runs through the history of art is a notion
of revolutionary creativity. If we want to know if something is an artwork, he suggested, we
should ask if it bears a resemblance to something else that we already recognize as an artwork.
Weitz’s view draws on Wittgenstein’s philosophical notion of family resemblance. Wittgenstein
William P. Seeley
204
argued that there were likely no rigid sets of features shared by all members of a category. Rather,
members of a category exhibit overlapping strands of similarity that transitively bind them all
together. His canonical illustration was the notion games. Extreme skiing, ice hockey, hurley,
rounders, boxing, backgammon, Monopoly, Parcheesi, Hungry Hungry Hippos, pick-up-sticks,
and jacks are all games. But there doesn’t seem to be any set of features they all share in common
other than loose transitive relations of resemblance.
Weitz’s view bears a similarity to exemplar theories of concepts. Exemplar theories are like prototype
theories. Both are similarity-based theories of concepts. Exemplar theorists eschew reference
to common prototypical features though. They appeal instead to measures of similarity
and difference to sets of exemplars. What makes something an artwork is that it is recognizably
similar to some set of artifacts we already categorize that way. For instance, artists often copy some
aspects of their precursors. They make artworks that resemble some set of past artworks they find
expressively interesting or historically important. Of course, in doing so they often amend those
stylistic expressive devices that they have borrowed, intentionally correcting some perceived flaw
in those prior expressive methods. Sometimes the corrections an artist makes are designed to repudiate
some art critical position held by their precursors (see Noel Carroll, 1993). Sometimes these
differences countenance creating a novel category of art to accommodate them.
Artists are engaged in a dialog with their precursors that is mediated by their works. It is more
often than not the case that one must situate a work within this kind of a dialog in order to understand
and appreciate it. Doing so reveals the underlying reasons for the choices an artist has made.
It reveals the functional form of the work and so helps articulate its point, purpose, or meaning.
Categorizing a work appropriately reveals the etiology of its content. Categorizing a work explains
the artistic salience of its features by identifying the root causes of their appearances in the
communicative intentions of the artist. Artworks can, in turn, be sorted together into categories
relative to their roles in the history of a range of art critical dialogs (Carroll, 1993, 1999; Danto,
2000, 2001). This is a cognitivist view of categories of art. It bears a resemblance to knowledge-based
or theory-theory accounts of concepts.
Why are appearances good indicators of the categories that something belongs to? Appearances
reflect the structure and function of an object or organism. They are, as a result, good cues to its
behaviors (Bloom, 2006). Evidence from developmental psychology suggests that young children
start by categorizing things by their appearances. But these strategies soon yield to a characteristicsto-
defining-shift in their category judgments (Kiel, 1989). Children shift the reasons for their category
judgments to track the roles things play in the causal texture of their environment. These
explanations shift their understanding of the underlying structure of categories of things from
recognizable appearances to the reasons that explain why they have the appearances they have in
the first place. Artworks are artifacts. They have the shape, structure, and appearances that they
have because they were designed that way with a goal or purpose in mind. Category judgments
about artworks, and artifacts in general, track this kind of intentional etiology (Barsalou, 1985;
Bloom, 2006; Winner, 2018). The net result is a functional account of form.
5 Conclusions
Where does this leave us when we think about cognitive psychology and art? Our capacity to
recognize something as an artwork requires that we categorize it appropriately. Categorizing
an artifact as an artwork, in turn, unlocks a recipe of normative conventions that guide how we
attend to its surface, perceive its artistically salient features, understand its content, and appreciate
their artistic qualities. Cognitive psychology is well-positioned to contribute to our understanding
of all of these aspects of our engagement with artworks. Explanations of this sort track the ways
consumers acquire, represent, and use information carried in the perceptible surfaces of artworks
Cognitive Psychology
205
in order to recover their artistically salient aesthetic, expressive, perceptual, and semantic content.
These kinds of explanations, as a result, serve as constraints on the acceptability of philosophical
and art critical theories about the nature of art. More importantly they explain the artistic qualities
of an artwork as artifacts of the categorial salience of its features. The artistically salient features of
a work are the ones that carry information about its point, purpose, or meaning and which category
of art it belongs to. In this regard, they can make a direct contribution to our understanding
of the nature of art.
Does any of this help reveal and explain those normative conventions that define categories of
art and related artistic practices in the first place? Maybe. Maybe not. I would be deeply surprised
if an understanding of the information processing that underwrites our interactions with artworks
had no bearing on our understanding of the sources of the normative conventions that govern
them. At the very least, cognitive psychology should contribute to our understanding of how
these normative conventions emerge out of the back-and-forth communicative exchange between
artists and consumers. My intuition is that cognitive psychology, perhaps in conjunction with
computational linguistics and anthropology, could explain the normative conventions constitutive
of our categories of art as products of an implicit, ongoing, dynamic social exchange that serves as
the grounds for communication in the first place. It might not thereby explain matters of taste. But
it should be able to articulate what is going on cognitively when we look under the hood. And this
should serve to explain the etiology and the normative conventions that define categories of art, as
well as the roles they play in artistic judgment. And this would be a significant contribution to our
understanding of the nature of art. But, of course, the validity of these intuitions is an empirical
matter and the subject for another day.
Note
1 One might argue that the perceived dynamics of either painting are a product of the perceptual interaction
between the work and the consumer. A painting is a static pattern of pigment suspended in a
medium. It has no dynamic qualities. What dynamic features we perceive in a painting are cognitively
projected onto it as a consequence of perceptual processing. If so one might argue that the dynamic qualities
of a painting really are explained in our understanding of their etiology in perception. Still, this is
true of many, if not far more, non-art cases. The projection of illusory motion onto the dusty venetian
blind that shielded your undergraduate aesthetics classroom from direct sunlight (and any concomitant
sense of vibrant energy) is equally explained this way. But it is not, as a consequence, (necessarily) understood
as an artwork (although it could be if you had intended to use it in that context to express some
art critical point about the history of philosophical aesthetics).
References
Barsalou, Lawrence W. (1985). Ideals, Central Tendency, and Frequency of Instantiation as Determinants of
Graded Structure in Categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11(4):
629–654.
Berlyne, Daniel E. (1971). Aesthetics and Psychobiology. New York: Appleton-Century-Croft.
Bloom, Paul J. (2006). How Children Learn the Meanings of Words. New York: Oxford University Press.
Carroll, Noël. (1992). Art, Intention, and Conversation. In ed. Gary Iseminger, Intention and Interpretation
(pp. 97–131). Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Carroll, Noël (1993). Historical Narratives and the Philosophy of Art. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,
51(3): 313–326.
Carroll, Noël (1999). The Philosophy of Art. New York: Routledge.
Carroll, Noël & Seeley, William P. (2013a). Cognitivism, Psychology, and Neuroscience: Movies as Attentional
Engines. In ed. Arthur Shimamura, Psychocinematics: Exploring Cognition at the Movies (pp. 52–75).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Danto. (2000). Art and Meaning. In ed. Noël Carroll, Theories of Art Today (pp. 130–140). Madison, WI:
University of Wisconsin Press.
William P. Seeley
206
Danto, Arthur C. (2001). The Work of Art and the Historical Future. In The Madonna of the Future,
pp. 4 16–431. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Desimone, Robert & Duncan, John. (1995). Neural Mechanisms of Selective Visual Attention. Annual Review
of Neuroscience, 18: 193–222.
Dickie, George. (1962). Is Psychology Relevant to Aesthetics? The Philosophical Review, 71(3): 285–302.
Fechner, Gustav. (1876/1978). Vorschule der Aesthetik. Leipzig: Breitkopf and Hartel.
Kastner, Sabine. (2004). Attentional Response Modulation in the Human Visual System. In ed. Michael
Posner, The Cognitive Neuroscience of Attention (pp. 144–156). New York: Guilford Press.
Keil, Frank C. (1989). Concepts, Kinds, and Conceptual Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Livingstone, Margaret S. (2002). Vision and Art: The Biology of Seeing. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Murphy, Gregory L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nanay, Bence. (2016). Aesthetics as the Philosophy of Perception. New York: Oxford University Press.
Noë, Alva. (2015). Strange Tools. New York: Hill and Wang.
Peelen, Marius V. & Kastner, Sabine. (2014). Attention in the Real World: Understanding Its Neural Basis.
TRENDS in Cognitive Science, 18(5): 242–250.
Schyns, Phillipe G. (1998). Diagnostic Recognition: Task Constraints, Object Information, and Their Interactions.
Cognition, 67: 147–179.
Seeley, William P. (2013). Art, Meaning, and Perception: A Question of Methods for a Cognitive Neuroscience
of Art. British Journal of Aesthetics, 53(4): 443–460.
Seeley, William P. (2020). Attentional Engines: A Perceptual Theory of the Arts. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Walton, Kendall L. (1970). Categories of Art. The Philosophical Review, 79(3): 334–367.
Weitz, Morris. (1956). The Role of Theory in Aesthetics. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 15(1):
27–35.
Winner, Ellen. (2018). How Art Works: A Psychological Exploration. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. (1966). Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious Belief. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Wolfe, Jeremy. (1994). Guided Search 2.0: A Revised Model of Visual Search. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
1: 202–238.
PART VComparisons among the Arts

DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-27 209
21FINE ARTS OF DISPLAYPhotography, Painting, DrawingPatrick Maynard
The English terms for our three topics, “ painting,” “ photography,” and “ drawing,” set us in a good direction for understanding each and their interrelations. That is the direction of distinct physical acts of production, rather than of their products, which indeed are named for those pro-cesses. Significantly, unlike the performance arts, these individual products persist beyond their formative events; still, they are experienced in terms of them, as kinds of artifacts, a term that, like “ work of art,” signifies acts of purposive making.
It seems important to emphasize this broad common ground of our three arts before investi-gating the different perspectives that they might provide for one another, since, even before the recent advent of that great mixer, digitalization, the “ postmodern” age has worked against such traditional distinctions, to an extent that it might appear to some futile, even reactionary, to con-sider these arts as distinctive. However, the idea of different arts, like that of art itself, has proved as robustly serviceable as other general empirical concepts, so long as, on Aristotle’s advice, we do not “ expect the same levels of precision in all inquiries.”
Nevertheless, preserving these common genre conceptions must be done critically. It is a par-ticular purpose of philosophy to identify, test and, where useful, suggest alternatives to the ideas, even terms, by which we conceive things. In a short discussion, that will entail beginning with some familiar matters put in rather unfamiliar ways. Fortunately, in this we can call on the ideas and terms of a number of original thinkers, from a variety of fields, to assist us.
1 Artifacts. Let us begin by asking, what in general, are artifacts? As child psychologist Michael Tomasello points out, a child wanting to know what an artifact or one of its parts or aspects is will often ask what it is for—for us— which is a special, purposive kind of “ why” question. Artifacts are things of double purpose: made on purpose for purposes. Two important points to add are, first, that many artifacts have several functions, which may be main or secondary, interrelated or not; next, that it is typical of humans to improvise with them, including in make- s hift ways, for purposes other than what they are normally for. Such, more generally, is an important basis for our creativity, without which we would have no fine arts.
2 Marking and Display. The physicality of these three formative methods helps advance us two more steps into our arts. When asked what any are for, we can reply that painting, drawing and photography are all for marking surfaces ( sometimes transiently, on screens), in three phys-ically distinct ways and t hat— n otably regarding their a rts— s uch marking is first for percep-tual, here visual, display purposes. Yet it is important to keep in mind that throughout their histories all three processes have had a variety of major technological applications, with and
Patrick
Maynard
210
without display functions, and apart from connections with fine art, also that some continue
to provide background sources of meaning for their arts.
As the printing press demonstrates, controlled surface- m arking, like motive powers, building
structures and so forth is one of the great families of human industry by which the world
has been rapidly transformed in modern times. For brief example, to begin with the latest
of our trio, photography, microchip manufacture is done by photo- etching, which was he
earliest of photography’s processes, and sound movies were made possible by marking p hotooptical
tracks on film, neither of which is display for visual perception. Most painting on
surfaces of the world is primarily for protective covering. Drawing is essential to the industrialized
world, in the way the surface- marking technologies of writing and moveable type were
to the previous. By its means precise, complex and standardized specifications can be made,
adjusted, stored, transmitted, thereby decisively “ drawing the line” between the traditional
and modern worlds with a draughtsman’s marker, and while most of that operates through
visual display, that is not for its own sake.
Taken more narrowly as arts, since display is the common function through which our
surface- marking processes work there, we need to consider more closely what the act of display
is. Making something perceptible is not necessarily to display it; display usually requires
also a show of purpose for that very act. Just as showing off is more than showing, display
artifacts will not only be perceivable ( visible) but to be understood as having been made for
that purpose— while, as artifacts, they are likely other purposes, as well. Should this seem
complicated, the matter is the same as seeing that someone is waving to us— w hich entails
making visible that we are meant not only to perceive the act but also to recognize it as being
done for that very purpose, besides others.
Counting so-called “orders of intentionality,” any artifact is already understood by at least
three: of our perceiving that it has been produced on purpose, for our use. Among these,
what may call “ display artifacts” — and these include our works of visual a rt— add two more
levels: that we are aware that they and some of their aspects were made and presented so that
we should recognize this and be guided thereby: such is their particular use. Thereby we can
protect our visual arts— particularly photography— from the idea that they are “ imitations”
of things or of natural effects. Of any relevant aspect of such works, it always makes sense to
ask why it was put or left there, in terms of what its purpose is for our perception, as opposed
to natural causes, and this strongly shapes our perception of it. “ What’s that doing there?” is
always a relevant question with these arts, and that question, as art historian Michael Podro
argued, is what “ sustains perception” of them.
In summary, the products of drawing, painting and photography, when considered as artworks,
are chiefly understood as display artifacts, whatever other functions they have, independently
or in combination. This is confirmed by our standard use of captions for any
artifacts, which tell us what they are in terms of what they are made from and how made, who
made them ( where and when) and what they are for. Failure to appreciate these familiar facts
is a great source of confusion, notably regarding so- called “ artists’ intentions.”
Another important critical observation here is that visual effects of our three display processes
are at this point usually, awkwardly, considered in terms of things called “ pictures,”
even “ pictures of things,” and— t o compound the c onfusion— t aken diversely as “ visual likenesses,”
“ iconic signs,” “ symbols,” even “ projections.” That is to take all their display purposes
as of one central kind. The modern arts, at least, having discredited some of these ideas,
we are further discomfited to find such works regularly considered via alleged relationships
to existents to which they “ point” or that they “ stand for”. ( What do comic drawings such
as Mickey Mouse stand for or point to?) It is remarkable that such elementary confusion
should be so entrenched, if only in “ theoretical” contexts, as these are not terms of everyday
Fine
Arts of Display: Photography, Painting, Drawing
211
discourse. One way to disembarrass ourselves of them is by staying on course, asking what
the displays of these kinds of artifacts— including comics and fi ctions— are for, for us. We note
that the ideas just listed are typically in terms of dyadic relationships, including the artifact
and its “ subject,” sometimes called “ the ( real) world” ( thereby invoking gratuitous issues of
“ realism”), leaving perceivers out, whereas they should be in terms of our active uses of such
artifacts. As the art historian E.H. Gombrich advised, we should always look to “ the function
of the image.” In order now to consider our three arts, let us ask what are the main functions
of their displays, with their differing productive processes.
3 “ Mediators” as Cognitive Artifacts. An interesting answer to the general question of purpose
was proposed by the psychologist Lev Vygotsky, who used one of the standard terms cited,
“ signs,” in a distinctive way. Among artifacts, Vygotsky distinguished “ signs” from “ tools.”
Tools he called “externally oriented” artifacts that we use to affect our environments, whereas
signs, he held, are “internally oriented”: they are artifacts that we make and place in our environments
to work back upon our minds, via our active perceptions of them. The latter artifacts
he termed a type of “mediators,” a term adopted here to avoid the ambiguity of “ signs.”
Thus, for Vygotsky, such a mediator “ has the reverse action” to a tool: it ‘ operates on the individual,
not the environment,’ so that by its use people become “ both the subjects and objects
of their own behavior.” Thereby we gain a measure of freedom from biological exigencies.
For simple example, he wrote, ancient “ use of notched sticks and knots” for reminders show
that humans early “ went beyond the limits of the functions given them by nature for a new
culturally- elaborated organization of their behavior.”
Of particular interest in such procedures is that thereby ( in a manner of speaking) we
actively “ use our brains.” We do so by singling out and exploiting some of their evolved
capacities, for our own purposes— such as, in Vygotsky’s mnemonic example, off- loading
short- t erm memory tasks to our visual systems— o r, when counting on our fingers, other
senses. This is possible due to the modularity of our sense and cognitive systems, and their
adaptability to “ detached” or borrowed uses, by means of our improvisatory powers, which
are characteristic of our creativity, and thus of our measures of freedom. Thereby humans
have invented what may be termed “ cognitive artifacts” as ways of calling select mental systems
to the assistance of others, via mediator through the environment. Important examples
are provided by the visual display marking systems by our three methods. Let us apply this to
one main function, depiction.
4 Depictive Uses. Let us begin with a common notion, that depiction is a method of
“ representation,” understanding that as a kind of display function that “ presents” content to
our minds, using, by mediation, our recruited great powers of visual processing. What kind of
mental content? Following Kendall Walton, we may say that this content is what is to be imagined.
It is characteristic of human mentality that we are active i maginers— indeed, dreamers—
even absent artificial help. As Vygotsky remarked, “ Unlike the ape, which [primatologist]
Köhler tells us is ‘ the slave of its own visual field,’ children acquire an independence with
respect to their concrete surroundings; they cease to act in the immediately given and evident
space.” Yet, by running mediating loops out into those surroundings, to be returned to our
brains, thereby exploiting aspects of our visual systems, we not only greatly elaborate and vivify
our imagining projects. We also sustain and share them publicly, by producing “ internally
oriented” physical artifacts that mobilize highly connected perceptual systems evolved for
environmental perception, but for our controlled imaginative uses. As shared mediators these
help establish cultural worlds. Again, fortunately, the modularity of our mental systems allows
us to select certain ones in order to get effects, in ourselves and others: for us.
As Gombrich argued, in unique terms of both vision science and art history, finding which
systems and how to recruit them has been a matter of trial and error. Not every effort is
Patrick
Maynard
212
effective; those that are stored and transmitted culturally. Finally to approach one of our three arts, a notable case, especially significant, even defining, for drawing, is our species’ sensitiv-ity to contour edges, thereby making drawn lines remarkably effective, despite the oft- stated observation that “ there are no lines in nature.” No need for that: contour lines are good ex-amples of Vygotskian mediators: changes we can easily make on environmental surfaces that we have discovered to work back very effectively on certain modules of our visual as well as tactile systems, to assist us in projects of imagining perceiving. Photography however is well known for not working so well by this economical system but rather through comparative tonal differences across surfaces, which is very laborious for hand work, if also a method of drawing.
Working critically with the conceptions of artifacts, purposes, “ mediators,” orders of in-tentionality, marking, display, depiction and so forth, we have now positioned painting and our other practices within broad contexts of activities of great meaning to all peoples, liberat-ing them from common, obscure and stultifying assumptions about reference, truth, resem-blance, “ the real world” and so forth. We have freed fiction from association with falsity, and thereby vivid depiction from illusion. Thus, no special cases need be made for nonfigurative uses of any of them at high levels, or for their important frequent mixes with each other as well as with other forms. Let us now consider more closely how painting compares with these other arts.
5 Painting: “ Location” and “ Sustained Recognition.” Affinities and differences among our three modes vary with historical cultures and among individual schools and artists. For example, in some cultures, painting and drawing are closely linked, even mixed, with writing, as “ arts of the brush.” Still, kinds of painting usually come under the heading, “ wet media,” whose dominant connotation is of spreading colorants, usually in layers on prepared “ grounds,” over surfaces, so as to cover and somewhat obscure them, whereas drawing is usually said to “ reserve” their surfaces. This, for example, is what constitutes ambiguities of classification for media such as watercolor. Accordingly, much painting is considered as “ built up,” especially with the development in the West of such thicker paints as oil and acrylic. Modern framed painting p ractices— m ore so p hotography— t ogether with literary accounts, have tended to blur our understanding of the many interactions of paintings with such surfaces, for example in fresco, where surface and ground are physically consubstantial.
Such close associations with physical surfaces are important for our historical, empirically based, understanding of painting, which needs to be freed not only from close association with figurative depiction but also with “ flat” and “ canvas,” which apply neither to the Sistine ceiling nor to many other canonic works. Greek painting was largely on walls and pots. Much of the greatest painting in cultures worldwide is closely related to architectural spaces, as wall and ceiling decoration. Indeed, it was to integrate painting, in a specific way, with architecture that one of its most famous and influential European techniques, linear perspective, was devel-oped. That greatly affected not only painting practices but ( not happily) the very conception of depiction. So important is the sense of addressing a surface to painting ( and drawing), with strong appeal to our species’ sensory/ motor systems linkages, that photography could never be a substitute for that, as its images were “ lossy” in this regard long before digitalization.
Another important characteristic difference is that, to use art historian Philip Rawson’s term, much painting, depictive or not, may be said to have location, in the following sense. Its surface is and is experienced as that of a s ubstance— t ypically itself an a rtifact— w ith a pre- existing presence giving it an independent nature, meaning and spatial location. Thus, “ located” applies not only to broad, permanent, architectural surfaces but also to portable, e.g., devotional, ones, including boxes. Being taken as part of a larger whole has, poten-tially, a great effect on the perception and meaning of such works ( often cropped by photo
Fine Arts of Display: Photography, Painting, Drawing
213
reproduction). It sets located painting apart from typical products of the other two media,
also to a degree from modern “ unlocated” painting, whose grounds, like screens, are entirely
in service of what is placed on them. Adding to its covering power, sometimes ranging over
large scales, and its physical consistency, this power of “ embodiment” connects painting historically
with sculpture, as well, in several great cultures, where the two arts, as just noted, may
also be combined with architecture.
Even less located modern paintings are typically seen differently from photographs owing
to their being “worked surfaces.” That difference we might consider, avoiding misleading
clichés about “ brushstrokes,” with a pair of brief comments, characteristic of contemporary
painters, by a nonfigurative one ( Brice Marden): that every time he begins a painting he is
“ terrified,” and that he knows when one is finished “ when the truck’s out front.” In contrast
with photographers, painters begin with surfaces on which to produce displays, usually by
building up through slow processes, with many deletions. Matisse had successive states photographed,
in case he decided to scrape them back to where it seemed he had lost something
too valuable. Because paintings largely consist not only in r elationships— n otably of colors
( of which we should say more) and shapes— but also relationships of those relationships ( also
to other forms and colors), and so forth, they are commonly set aside by painters while there
seem to be relationships needing further to be “ resolved”. Such is a common modern condition,
that finished paintings are ones not so much completed as abandoned. To be sure,
however, traditional painting in most cultures is practiced differently. Typically, projects are
prescribed in nature, material, space and t ime- f rame, and accomplished through teachable
stages of production, similar to those in most production activities, while still allowing for
wider individual variation, “ riffs” on standard themes.
From our artifactual beginning, we have been considering painting mainly in terms of artists,
who make things on purpose. Yet such works are also for purposes, notably visual display
to certain people of whom artists take themselves as representative: “ for us.” With painting,
such display is usually more permanent than that of photography or drawing, and also seen
from more positions to which it should “ carry.” Delacroix observed that pictures need to
“ give the impression of taking in the whole thing at once,” yet this must merge with what
Michael Podro termed “ sustained recognition.” All visual perception, as Gombrich stressed,
is a process of hypothesis and revision, artworks more so. This is particularly true of paintings,
which tend to provide much physical latitude of display. Paintings are far more common in
museums than are the others, partly due to their scale, physicality and permanence, but also
because of time taken with them by the hypothetical, investigative nature of their sustained
recognition. That is perhaps easiest to explain in terms of figurative pictures, where we are
prompted by the display to recruit our abilities at environmental object and event recognition,
combined with many other factors, including information in captions. Podro’s idea is
not only that we do not take in all of a scene in an instant, but also that, in the case of works
of art, we are rewarded as we go back and forth between what is presented and how it was
done, as we increase grasp of what we see and imagine seeing, gaining insight dialectically, in
processes likely never completed, indeed renewed on many occasions over lifetimes.
6 Views from Photography.
Our understanding of photography has the advantage of a short, well documented, history,
containing articulate records of its various kinds, revealing its relations with painting and
drawing at every stage. A striking feature is that photography ( which was named by scientist
John Herschel) was from its beginnings understood as a family of technologies. Necessities
often being daughters of i nventions— as for sound recording on cylinder or, later, tape; thereafter
transistor r adios— in a modern age of patents, “ science” often came fi rst— search for as
many different “ applications,” as they were called, for various markets, later. Even as new
Patrick
Maynard
214
depictive technologies emerged from early photography, issues of fine art were not prom-inent; rather, those of labor- s aving and cheaper industrial production were. That is not to say that aesthetic matters were neglected. Perceptual qualities of early processes were much commented on: notably fine detail and continuous tonal gradations. For depictive uses, other important features included the striking formative factors that all parts of the image were formed at once and, with the spirit of that age, free of hand work. Related to but distinct from these was the most important, then as now, combinations of the artifactual functions of depiction with detection.
The first formal presentations of photo methods made little appeal to them as “ picturesque agents”, but rather as methods of what the writer Siegfried Kracauer termed “ recording and revealing” for various sciences. Thereby photography, whether by camera or superposition, can be considered in terms of controlled information channels. In general, these may be un-derstood in terms of an electromagnetic ( or particle) “ source,” an intervening “ scrim,” and a uniform “ screen.” The scrim modulates a fairly uniform flow from the source, and these modulations, as they differentially affect the screen, are recorded as information, made acces-sible by a series of optical filters along the channel to eliminate noise— to which photography is prone. This is a process of selective physical filtering all the way.
Just as with shadows, to which they were often likened, provided thereby are means for detecting states of any factor in this causal trio. Regarding sources, radioactivity, UV light, X- rays and the chemistry of stars were discovered this way. Regarding screens, the photo- chemistries of photography were thereby discovered. Most commonly, however, attention goes to the “ scrims” where selected differences in these light modulators produce differences ( thus information) on the screens. These are usually called “ pictures,” many of which are “ photographs of” things, events and conditions.
An ongoing source of confusion regarding photography is due to several factors: not distin-guishing the different things p hoto- t echnologies are for, forgetting that artifacts, like organs in living nature, typically have multiple functions, also that these functions may interact in a variety of ways, thereby producing more complex functions. With photography, the main functions usually combined ( aside from photo- reproduction etc.) are depiction, as a means of imagining, and detection. Most figurative photographs are looked at mainly for purposes of depiction, imagining seeing, with the detective functions appearing at various strengths more or less in support of the depictive. Again as with shadows, the sense of causal connec-tion among source, scrim and “ screens by filtered channels may add a sense of presence to the viewers’ experiences. To skeptics regarding the effectiveness of such “ invisible” factors as causal relations, we may reply that live broadcasts of events have an impact different from in-distinguishable recorded ones. Phenomenology does not reduce to epistemology. Thus to the material presence of painting largely lacking in photography, photography replies with a sense of indirect presence of source and scrim subjects, to some extent controlled by photographers.
Digitalization has provided a simple way to explain the complementary situation, where imagining seeing supports detection. Space exploration has made familiar vehicles carrying a variety of detectors, with filters for different kinds of sources beyond light. For example, from rockets: fields, particles, waves— including magnetism, plasma, radar, sonar, radio, mi-crowaves, g ravity— f rom surface probes: seismic activity, wind, temperature, chemistry and so forth. Distinct from these sensors are those for “ optical remote sensing,” including cameras with filters for UV, infrared and “ visible” light. All these reports are received, stored and sent as digital messages, in which, given the computer’s “ fungibility”— ability to transform masses of different kinds of information into common forms— t heir reception may be shaped to taste.
The electromagnetic reports are usually of prime interest, since by their means spatial shapes and locations of individual sources, object surfaces with their spatial contours may easily be
Fine Arts of Display: Photography, Painting, Drawing
215
placed in overall contexts, following optical laws regarding gradients. Next, these reports
may be so processed and tuned as to produce on screens “ user friendly” visual displays— that
is, displays easily accessed by the human visual cortex, which, thanks to millions of years
of evolution, comprises one of the largest information processing systems known. Nothing
similar holds for the other data streams, which might be well suited to the environmental perception
powers of other kinds of beings. Unlike reading oscillographs, our powerful everyday
environmental visual processes are thereby recruited as mediators, albeit supplemented with
special training. A major source of confusion about photography is that, given that our primate
species is so dependent on that information channel, we tend, unscientifically, to identify
the subject itself with our visual imagining of it, whereas depictive imagining should be
understood here as an aid to detection via only certain, highly filtered, electromagnetic data
sets, avoiding perennially puzzling confusions about “ realism.”
Concerning art, early serious photographers first attempted to match some of drawing’s
and painting’s attractions, but soon turned toward autonomous “ p hoto- s tandards,” as they
explored what seemed to be aesthetically distinctive features of their technologies as they
developed. However, with the later modernist age’s tendencies away from such “ purist” conceptions
of distinct media, such views have lost currency. Speaking frankly about the artworld
however, practical issues affecting photographers’ likening their works to painting
returns us to the issue of artifacts, now as valued material objects persisting through time.
This reintroduces the idea of “ fungibility,” but now as exchange value: money. Augmenting
paintings’ advantages as displayed artifacts, sometimes with “ location,” is a physical robustness
to which the other two kinds of images can only aspire. Besides their usual fragility of
grounds, the two are extremely sensitive to electromagnetic phenomena, and so exhibited
for limited times only. For that reason alone, artworld investment in them— thereby their
market value— h as been cautious. This was for long especially true of color photography,
which nowadays is usually transferred to dyes. While painting’s analogue deteriorations are
well- known from centuries of use, photo technologies are so recent as to require science to
predict their permanence.
7 Drawing and Design. Regarding drawing and its deep relations with painting, we may be said
so far to have barely scratched the surface. By contrast with photography, drawing’s history
emerges from a prehistory of tens of thousands of years, and its first full manifestations—
notably ( along with carving) in caves of the Upper P aleolithic— show richness of content
and high technical facility that would have been developed earlier on sunlit surfaces. It is
no wonder that drawing and painting are dated to the appearance of modern Homo sapiens;
indeed that “ modern” version is itself dated by the beginning of these marked artifacts. Such
species dating is usually explained in terms of this “ material culture” evidence for possession
of language, since it indicates “ use of symbols”— of signs with content, beyond the expressive
such as with body painting for decoration or to indicate status. However, drawing as having
intentional content would no more be limited to depictive representation in its prehistory
than it is now. Considered as Vygotskian mediators par excellence, such markings have a
number of other intelligent u ses— i ncluding marks as markers, for re- i dentifying, counting,
placing locations, indicating directions— w hereby mediator loops into the environment are
made to bring internal systems into concert. Taken in broad meaning, drawing is by far the
most important marking process, upon which much else depends. Writing is a form of drawing;
as for printing, every font to be drawn.
For perhaps drawing’s most significant use, we may take our lead from languages besides
English, where physical actions are not so much stressed— notably from the Italian “disegno,”
which means both drawing and design, extending beyond depiction. We can suppose people
planning complex things through drawings with no more interest in visual imagining than
Patrick
Maynard
216
when marking cutting patterns on stone, wood or cloth. Instead, the basic process of drawing might be first understood by drawing theorist John Willats’ dimensionality approach, whereby ( roughly) 0D points mark 1D lines on 2D surfaces, producing there 0, 1 and 2D artifacts, which may further be understood in terms of 0 – 3 D entities, partly by tonal gradations, which from its start photography exploited. Of course, simply as perceptual variations of surfaces and understood as traces of intentional gestures, drawn marks and the units they form are replete with other phenomenological characteristics even before they designate or depict anything. So suggestive to the imagination are the slightest marks that special protocols are required to limit them when used for technical work. How does painting appear from this quickly sketched draughter’s standpoint?
Drawing was taken, for millennia in different cultures, as a basis of painting, for surfaces covered by paints after being divided by lines. Beyond that, the adage, “ if you can’t draw it, you can’t paint it,” signified drawing as the basic practice for studying and coming to un-derstand the structures of things. By contrast, “ modern painting” in the West is understood as rooted in a 19th-century liberation—notably through color—from academic principles based on contour and tonal drawing, which bound painting to sculpture. Yet the situation is never simple. For significant example, the early modern Delacroix wrote ( somewhat unfairly) against “ line of beauty” ideas, “ I see the most beautiful landscape: the idea of line does not come into my mind. The lark sings, the river sparkles with a thousand diamonds, the foliage murmurs; where are any lines to produce these charming sensations?”, and more generally: “ Contour should come last… Only the very experienced can use it accurately.” Yet he drew, never parted with his own drawings and insisted on close attention to half- t ones in painting, while the next founding modern, Cézanne, referred to his colored structures as drawing.
Drawing remains integral to most painting, figurative or not, yet— e ven aside from ques-tions of c olor— artistic temperaments continue to suggest natural differences between the two. If from the point of view of photography painting seems difficult, from that of drawing painting may at first seem easy, since effects that must be earned in drawing are easily pro-duced by application of paint, which in addition produces a wealth of suggestive accidents and thereby a stronger sense of dialogue between artist and medium than does drawing. Yet this very richness of painting, with its bolder effects, can soon overwhelm with a confusion of relationships, from which the chastened painter returns to the drawing board. Drawing, at least as design through visual relationships, is often considered the main control for painting. Thus Delacroix’s rival, Ingres: “ Le dessin est la probité de l’art.”
8 Art Issues. To this point, we have considered our three image- m aking processes with inter-mittent reference to fine arts. For example, as mentioned, in its early decades, while pho-tography was often compared with painting and drawing— a nd by now we must mention graphics— in certain ways, it was little considered in art contexts. The reason is not, as some later assumed, complacency, but far more thoughtful considerations, to understand which we need to consider “ the fine arts” (“beaux arts”) like painting and photography, in our opening terms of powers of production rather than of individual objects that are “ works” of them. Our “ what is art?” question therefore is best put in the terms of historian P. O. Kristeller’s: “ what are the fine arts?”
What we have considered the “ arts” generally, for thousands of years and in many soci-eties, are reasoned capacities for producing artifacts. As such, they are thought of as kinds of skills— l ikely teachable, forms of knowledge— b ut, unsurprisingly, never just that. Such knowledge requires general principles, but, as the ancients insisted, special kinds of judg-ment are required to apply the general to concrete individuals. Such holds for all admired human powers: thus the common ideas of talent and inspiration. As Kristeller pointed out, the “ modern system of the [fine] arts” emerged in specific circumstances of the m id- 18th
Fine
Arts of Display: Photography, Painting, Drawing
217
century. in the plural form of a cluster, notably those for producing the fine. Fine or beautiful
things are prized and preserved by all s ocieties— a s are skills for judging t hem— p roducing
cultural aspects highly relevant for the maintenance of the wider cultures themselves, as fine
things come to be taken as expressive of— as making perceptible, for group display—cultural
values, often related to religions, that provide social identity. It is not surprising therefore that
depiction, and like appeals to imagination ( as in myths), should be closely related skills. In
visual fine arts, depiction and fineness in artifact production are hardly ever found separate.
We may better understand more recent ideas of the arts, indeed of modern arts, by noting that
the classical ideas of individual talent and inspiration were merged in the 19th century with
the older of cultural display or expression, in the form of individual expression. Although that
could conflict with the more traditional role of cultural expression— t ragically so in authoritarian
s ocieties— it merged with it in modern cultures that increasingly characterized themselves as
individualistic. Thereby, individual freedom came to be a cultural value that might be displayed
preeminently by exercise of a fine art, as artists in different arts cooperated in producing a culture
of modernism based on that.
A second simple consideration might also help dispel ongoing confusions. Given that, as we
have seen, the fine arts idea was developed by grouping four individually valuable components, the
idea has, like any viable structure, persisted, evolved, through fl exibility— t hat is, by changing the
components’ importances and their relations. In different eras each component has been developed,
shifted in position, value and attention. For notable example, s elf- e xpression has been positioned
against the other formative factor, skill— even depiction and the aesthetic. More widely, photography
has greatly affected attitudes toward depiction and its skills, whereas it has long produced
ambivalence regarding its own two formative components, and thereby intentionality. This ambivalence
increased as technological advances in equipment rapidly advanced and were widely marketed.
Received art photographers such as Edward Weston and Robert Capa have responded by denying
that they practiced fine art; some have held that modern photography has changed or even replaced
the idea of visual fine art. That returns us for a last time to our initial artifact considerations.
Of particular interest to such photographers is photography’s introduction into the formative
component of “ fine arts” a third factor besides art and s elf- expression. This is what provides its
detective powers: the causal “ scrim” ( also source), and information channel, including optics and
other filters, variations of which are registered by the image. Calling on the frequent impression
of the presence of subjects detected by photographs, many photographers have sought to
“thematize”— that is, especially display and develop— rather than minimize it. Regarding causes
generally, although we often speak of “ the cause” of an event, we know well that there are always
multiple factors, even multiple causal “ agents” as opposed to “ conditions,” and also ( though
not well enough) that much that happens is owing to chance. Even in photography’s earliest
periods, it had become clearer that the presence of the two classic formative factors of skill and
self- expression could not only survive new technologies but merge with their detective function.
Understandably, where several causal agents are prominent, perception requires more instances
to distinguish them. Thus, art photographers’ portfolios tend to be large. Yet the sense of style
and other aspects of mentality that emerge may include how other causal factors have been displayed
through mental agency. Thereby what is shown and what shows up need not be so distinct.
Furthermore, across the much broader history of i mage- m aking occur many n on- m odern, also
non- W estern, traditions in which the maker’s s elf- e xpression is not thematized, while actual or
alleged manifestations of s ubjects— o ften religious o nes— i n images are. Modernist painters not
infrequently attempted to provide experiences similar to that. Such images tend to be disassociated
from time, even space, also to restrain naturalistic, even figurative, appeals to imagining
seeing or even to visual experience.
Patrick
Maynard
218
As a modern species, we began painting and drawing; as infants each of us does, too, though very few continue. As a fine art, painting, like drawing, has dropped off steeply in practice, qual-ity and expression of human c ultures— their “ ways of seeing.” That is partly owing to photog-raphy, whose own massive output, including its use in marketing, tends to overwhelm not only its arts but Podro’s visual practices of sustained recognition. The earlier productive and percep-tual processes are slowly paced for fast times, so that the question how painting appears through photography invites another jest: “ Poorly, because of all the cameras in the way.” Yet, whether taken literally or in terms of p hoto- r eproduction, a positive side of the reply is that a rt— l argely painting— m useums worldwide are often the most visited gated venues in cities, where their lec-tures, prints and books do lively business.
Given its roots in our nature, the ever renewed stimulations of nature and perception, and our need to give form to our experiences through mediators, there is little doubt that painting as a serious practice will continue. It is hoped that the broader philosophical and historical approaches presented here, recommending replacing some familiar terms and conceptions with more useful ones, will improve understanding and thereby the practice and appreciation of painting, as well as the other pictorial arts, for individual and social expression, which, among all our activities, we look to as exemplary displays of human freedom.
Bibliography
Delacroix, E. ( 1972) The Journal of Eugène Delacroix, transl. S. Pach.
Gombrich, E. H. ( 1960) Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial Representation, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kracauer, S. ( 1960) Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kristeller, P. O. ( 1965) Renaissance Thought and the Arts, New York: Harper & Row.
Maynard, P. ( 1998) The Engine of Visualization: Thinking Through Photography, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Maynard, P. ( 2010) Drawing Distinctions: The Varieties of Graphic Expression, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Podro, M. ( 1995) Depiction, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Tomasello, M. ( 1999) The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. ( 1956) Mind and Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes, M. Cole et al., eds, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Walton, K. ( 1990) Mimesis as Make- Believe: On the Foundations of the Representational Arts, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Willats, J. ( 1997) Art and Representation: New Principles in the Analysis of Pictures, Princeton, MA: Princeton University Press.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-28 219
22PHILOSOPHY OF PHOTOGRAPHY NATURALIZEDScott Walden
Over the past several decades, two philosophical methodologies have emerged in the course of investigations into photography. The first, which I call the Platonistic approach, involves revealing necessary or sufficient conditions involved in concepts closely associated with photography, and then explores conceptual relations between these, seeking leverage for revision, and then offering such revisions as advancements in our knowledge of the medium.
The second, which I call the Aristotlean approach, instead canvasses h igh- level functions as-sociated photographic technology and then examines ways in which photographers use those functions in contexts ranging from family snapshots to the production of contemporary art. This methodology also delves into how those high-level functions emerge from the interplay of lower- level functions manifested by the components out of which the technologies are assembled. As photographic technologies develop, the high- level functions change, and advancements in our knowledge take the form of cataloguing such changes and of exploring how the new functions are pressed into service by photographers who are addressing the needs of social environments in which they find themselves. Less often, but still importantly, such advancements take the form of discerning the interplay of lower- l evel functions with the aim of understanding the potentials or limitations of high- level functions in addressing the needs of the social environments as they are at a given point in time.
In what follows, I outline a recent application of the Platonistic approach and argue that the methodology it adopts to gain leverage for conceptual revision is flawed and that, more generally, the approach does little to advance our understanding of photography. I then sketch one applica-tion of the Aristotlean approach and ponder the larger question of how that approach might have application, not only to our understanding of photography, but to our investigations into the philosophy of art generally.
1 Roger Scruton and the New Theorists
The most influential application of the Platonistic approach is found in Roger Scruton’s argument that viewers cannot take an aesthetic interest in ideal photographs and that, therefore, ideal pho-tographs cannot be artworks ( S cruton 1981). Suppose that a painter thinks of a man on a horse as possessing authority, arrogance even. In creating an image of him, she can use her control over details to arrange the eyes in a way that gives the sense of authority, or arrange the lie of the arm in a way that reveals the arrogant character ( S cruton 1981, p. 581). In so doing she creates not only an image, but as well an image that is a representation, where a representation is defined as
Scott
Walden
220
an image that presents “ n ot just the object portrayed, but [as well] the [artist] seeing that object”
( Scruton 2009, p. 451). Viewers encountering such representations can recuperate those thoughts
of the painter, and in so doing they, by definition, take an aesthetic interest in those paintings.
But now suppose that a photographer likewise thinks of the man on the horse as authoritative
and arrogant and that he wants to use photographic technology to form a representation imbued
with such thoughts. If we accept a traditional definition of an ideal photograph as having been
formed automatically, by means of the camera mechanism, a mechanism that preserves independence
from beliefs or other mental states of the photographer, he is expressively hamstrung, as
such independence prevents him from arranging details in the eyes or in the lie of the arm in the
ways available to the painter. On this traditional definition of ideal photographs, the photographer
cannot produce a representation, and, therefore, viewers cannot take an aesthetic interest in his
photograph. Absent such potential to generate aesthetic interest, ideal photographs, unlike paintings,
cannot be artworks.
Likewise adopting the Platonistic approach, Diarmuid Costello and Dawn Wilson offer a response
to Scruton’s controversial thesis. Taking as their starting point the transduction of light
energy into chemical energy on a roll of film or electrical energy on a digital sensor, instances
of which they refer to as “ photographic event[s]” ( Costello 2018, p. 78), they argue that many of
the techniques photographers use to gain control over their images in ways that can render them
representations in Scruton’s sense are in fact steps in the formation of ideal photographs or, in
their own terminology, are involved in instances of “ photography proper” ( Costello 2018, p . 78).
If a photographic event is necessary, but not sufficient, for the creation of a photograph,
then all those subsequent stages of image p rocessing— w ithout which there could be no visible
image— s hould in principle count as strictly photographic. If one cannot generate a
photograph without the use of such means, they can hardly be regarded as incidental to
“photography proper.”
(Costello 2018, p. 80)
So understood, a “ p hotograph” is a visual image, the causal history of which necessarily implicates
a photographic event...
(Costello 2018, p. 78)
Darkroom techniques such as dodging and burning, double- e xposure, or use of multiple
enlargers are central to the history of the discipline; just as the manipulation of variables such
as hue, contrast, saturation and other forms of p ost- production, such as gradient mapping, are
already central to that of digital photography. So long as they implicate a photographic event
they are photographic—irrespective of whether they preserve belief-independence.
(Costello 2018, p. 88)
Photographic events result in arrays of altered energy states on film or digital sensors, arrays that
are not visible. Because photographs are, by definition, visible, such arrays are not photographs.
They are better referred to as mere “ registers” ( Wilson 2021, p. 168). But, because a photographic
event is, by definition, a necessary condition for a photograph, all the processing steps “ necessarily
implicated” in rendering those registers visible become part of the definition of “ photography
proper” ( Costello 2018, p. 78). Thus, contra Scruton’s definition, ideal photographs need not
have been formed by wholly automatic, mechanical means, means that preserve independence
from beliefs or other thoughts of the photographer. And, because techniques such as double exposure
or other forms of p ost- production can in this way be part of the formative process of ideal
photographs, the possibility is opened for photographers to have the sort of control over their
Philosophy
of Photography Naturalized
221
images that permits those images to be imbued with thoughts about their subjects and, thus, to
be representations. Viewers can therefore take an aesthetic interest in photographs— even ideal
photographs—and so photographs can be artworks after all.
Costello and Wilson offer such reasoning as advances in our understanding of photography.
They dub Scruton’s assumption that automaticity is at the core of the definition of an ideal photograph
the “ Orthodox Theory,” and contrast this with a “N ew Theory” that dispenses with such
orthodoxy and instead defines “ photography proper” in terms of visible images that implicate
photographic events along with any processing steps necessarily implicated in getting from the
event to the image (Costello 2018, p. 74–78).
I do not share their conviction that such reasoning offers genuine advances, and for two reasons.
My first concern questions the means by which they gain leverage for definitional revision.
Because photographs are, by definition, visible, and because registers are not visible, Costello
and Wilson argue that all the processing steps required to render a register visible are part of the
definition of “ photography proper.” These processing steps are “ necessarily implicated” in the
formation of the visible image, and it is thus this modality that constitutes the fulcrum point for
their revision of the definition of “ p hotography proper.” But how exactly are we to interpret this
modality? Given that they seek to revise a definition of “ p hotography proper,” one would expect
a very strong interpretation, perhaps as a logical necessity. But it is not clear that they are entitled
to a modality with such strength. Instead, the various processing steps that yielded a visible image
on the basis of the register, if they are in any sense necessary, would be necessary only in a weaker
nomological sense, one according to which, given the physical laws governing such processing steps,
no visible image could have been produced without those steps.
But my more fundamental objection is with the Platonistic methodology itself or, at least, with
its application to investigations into technologies such as those associated with photography. Photographic
technology is, after all, just another contemporary technology, one akin to automotive
and telephonic technologies, and so we should expect that the sorts of investigations that yield
understanding in relation to those latter technologies would be the same ones that would yield
understanding in relation to photography. Looking to automotive technology takes us in the direction
of the Aristotlean methodology outlined at the outset.
2 Functional Knowledge and Engineering Knowledge
Call the two types of knowledge associated with the Aristotlean approach “ functional knowledge”
and “ e ngineering knowledge.” With respect to cars, much functional knowledge is quite
simple. I know, for example, that when I turn the steering wheel clockwise, my car turns to the
right, and when I turn it counterclockwise, it turns to the left. Matters become less simple, however,
when we examine the high- l evel functions of cars in relation to their environments. Suppose
that, at a very general level, cars are understood as technologies that function to transport a small
number of people and a limited amount of cargo medium distances without physical exertion and
under protection from the weather. The success of this technology at performing this function
both inexpensively and reliably has had profound impacts on urban design and average physical
fitness, and anyone professing knowledge of such technology must be aware of such impacts and
the normative dimensions associated with them.
Engineering knowledge in relation to automotive technology is likewise sometimes simple, as
when one learns how the high-level function of the steering wheel is realized in a rack-and-pinion
assembly, or sometimes complex, as when one learns how kinetic energy for locomotion can be
derived from chemical energies stored in gasoline, in hydrogen or in electrical batteries. Such engineering
knowledge also has implications for h igh- l evel functions and thus for our understanding
of the limitations of what h igh- l evel functions might be manifested. For example, limitations on
Scott
Walden
222
the storage of energy in electrical batteries has implications up at the functional level in terms of distances electric cars can travel without being recharged, with the result that those using such cars frequently experience “ range anxiety.”
It is important to note that both functional knowledge and engineering knowledge are con-stantly in flux as technologies develop. With regard to automotive functional knowledge, in the early days, cars functioned as gadgets for the wealthy, as they were so unreliable that owners had to hire technicians on a full- time basis just to keep them operating. These days, however, cars can undergo many months of daily use without need for any maintenance beyond filling the gas tank, or charging the battery, and keeping an eye on the tire pressure. With regard to engineering knowledge, an understanding of carburetors or clutches has been replaced with an understanding of fuel injectors or torque converters. Such flux stands in sharp contrast with the sort of defini-tional knowledge sought by those who might adopt the Platonistic methodology in relation to cars. Aristotleans who wish to understand cars and their roles in our society and impacts on our planet are not theorists who search for stable, essential qualities of cars, such as an automotive event ( a transduction of chemical energy into kinetic energy) and all the steps necessarily impli-cated in making that kinetic energy available to ordinary drivers, with the aim of determining what counts as automotive technology proper. Instead, they explore the e ver- changing functional capacities of cars, and how those capacities are materially realized, all in relation to urban plan-ning, global warming, public health and other pressing issues of our times.
The structure of Aristotlean knowledge in relation to photography is strikingly similar. The list of functional capacities of photographic technology is familiar. Such technology enhances our epistemic capacities, both by expanding our perceptual sensitivities beyond what they are natu-rally capable of ( via telephoto lenses, sensitivity to electromagnetic radiations beyond the visible spectrum, high shutter speeds capable of freezing action) and by offering warrant for perceptual beliefs thereby formed that would be absent had the images been manugraphic rather than pho-tographic ( imagine Steve Austin of 1970s television fame, taking up painting in his retirement, using his enhanced bionic eye to freeze the motion and on this basis create sketches of Muybridge’s famous galloping horse, and our lack of warrant for beliefs formed on the basis of those sketches relative to Muybridge’s actual photographs). Such h igh- l evel functions also intersect scientific, surveillance and photojournalistic practices and, as Arthur Danto ( 1998) noted, with ethical con-siderations, given that h igh- speed shutters can result in unflattering depictions of persons, and given that the special warrant offered by photographs can reveal truths about persons that are at odds with the appearances they autonomously decide to project. An additional—and coveted— high- level function is the capacity of photographs rather than manugraphs to furnish viewers with a special sense of contact with the subjects of those photographs, thereby explaining the frequent placement of photographs of departed loved ones on desks and nightstands. And, of course, there is the large and fascinating question of how these epistemic, ethical and phenomenological func-tions of photographic technology are used ( or abused) by artists.
The development of engineering knowledge in relation to photographic technology is a na-scent field or, at least, it is in terms of the development of knowledge about how high- level func-tions that are of interest to philosophers are realized by arrays of l ower- l evel functional units. The distinction is both important and unimportant. It is important in the sense that knowledge of the operation of h igh- level functions, such as how the release of the shutter button leads to a timed exposure of l ight- gathering sensor, is obviously highly developed in the minds of the engineers who designed the camera, and yet is of little interest to philosophers. But it is unimportant in the sense that such knowledge is of a kind with that which philosophers seek. In the same way that the designers of a shutter mechanism know the functional parameters of that m echanism— t hey know, for example, the extent to which images created with it will be subject to distortions aris-ing from the “ r olling shutter” e ffect— p hilosophers seek engineering knowledge of the functions
Philosophy
of Photography Naturalized
223
enumerated in the previous paragraph in order both to understand how photographic technology
can furnish those functions and to understand what the limitations of that technology in those
regards will be.
Kendall Walton is perhaps the first philosopher to seek engineering knowledge in relation to
photography in a careful way. In his celebrated “ Transparent Pictures,” Walton ( 1984) takes as his
starting point the c ontact- function or, as he calls it, the “ immediacy” that photographs afford:
... In general, photographs and paintings ( a nd comparable nonphotographic pictures) affect us
very differently. Compare Francisco Goya’s etchings The Disasters of War with the Civil War
photographs by Mathew Brady and his associates...It is hard to resist describing the difference
by saying that the photographs have a kind of immediacy or realism which the etchings lack.
(Walton 1984, p. 247)
He then traces this capacity to the transparency of photographs and opacity of manugraphs, the
transparency enabling photographs to function as windows through which “ we see, quite literally,
our dead relatives themselves when we look at photographs of them” ( Walton 1984, p. 252). Such
transparency is, in turn, realized in the mechanistic character of the photographic technology
insofar as “[i]n order to see through the picture to the scene depicted, the viewer must have visual
experiences which do not depend on the picture maker’s beliefs in the way that paintings do”
(Walton 1984, p.264).
I have argued that Walton is wrong in this latter regard ( W alden 2016), but it is the general
methodological point that is central to this discussion, and with this I concur. Unlike Costello,
Scruton and Wilson, Walton is not interested in presenting a web of definitions, devising a rationale
for altering one of them, and then pointing to any resultant logical consonances or dissonances
as constituting an advancement in our understanding of photography. Instead, he takes as his starting
point an important high-level function and then postulates whatever lower-level functional
units are required in order to explain how that high- l evel function can be manifested. His methodology
is continuous with science, and in this sense, he naturalizes philosophy of photography.
Walton’s term for this mode of investigation is “ theory construction” ( Walton 2008, p . 110),
and he endorsees it forcefully, devoting his American Society for Aesthetics Presidential Address
to a discussion of it ( Walton 2007). The language, however, can be misleading, as Costello refers
to his Platonistic investigations as a mode of inquiry that seeks a new “ t heory of photography”
( C ostello 2017). Indeed, Costello divides current researchers into those who endorse the
“ Orthodox Theory” ( 2018, p.5) and those who endorse the “ New Theory” ( 2018, p.7) the former
defining “ photography proper” ( 2018, p.78) in terms of “ automaticity” ( 2018, p.6) and the latter
defining it so as to include “ necessarily implicated” processing steps lying between the photographic
event and the photograph ( Costello 2017, 2018). It is not for me to legislate on the proper
use of the term “ theory,” but to my mind, Walton’s usage lies much closer to historical usage of
the term than does Costello’s. Newton’s resolution of phenomena such as apples falling from trees
and orbiting satellites in terms of the mutual attraction of massive bodies governed by the i nversesquare
law is the textbook case of theorizing, and this mode of inquiry does seem closer in structural
terms to what I am calling engineering knowledge than it does to Costello’s investigations.
Regardless, and in order to avoid confusion, I use “ engineering knowledge” to refer to this aspect
of the Aristotlean methodology and avoid the term “ theorizing” as much as possible.
Perhaps even more challenging than Walton’s investigation into the contact- function of photography
are investigations into how photographs function in terms of furnishing warrant for
perceptual beliefs formed on the basis of looking at them. Understanding this function and its limitations,
unlike understanding the function of a steering wheel, is a complex matter, as instances
of it supervene on a causal chain that includes, not only the photographic technology utilized
Scott
Walden
224
by the photographer, but also the perceptual systems of viewers of the resultant photograph and whatever assemblies of first-and higher-order mental states that result from the operation of those systems and that constitute warrant for the perceptual beliefs that form in their minds. The re-quired engineering knowledge will thus straddle both the operations of photographic technology and the operations of the human psyche. No doubt the automaticity of the photographic process will figure in this, but explaining how it does so without making implausible belief attributions to ordinary viewers of photographs is a surprisingly difficult task.
At the most challenging level, however, is the question of how the Aristotlean methodology may be pressed into the service of fostering our understanding of issues in the philosophy of art generally. Walton is sanguine in this regard, arguing that, in the same way that Newton’s theory of gravitation yielded an understanding that united categories which, on our folk understanding of the world, were quite disparate ( falling apples and orbiting moons, for example), the Aristotlean approach will likely render cherished distinctions within artworld discussions obsolete but then lump together various artworld phenomena with phenomena traditionally thought to be entirely unrelated to art ( Walton 2007, P.§4).
I am likewise sanguine, although I foresee developments in our general understanding of art more often taking the form of discerning the functions of artworks in the most general terms and then investigating how those functions are realized in more basic functional units. In his final publication, Arthur Danto, drawing inspiration from Kant’s Critique of Judgement—although not the inspiration that is ordinarily associated with that text— c oncludes that “...the artist finds ways to embody [an] idea in a sensory medium,” illustrating this function with Kant’s example of the artist who is tasked with conveying the god Jupiter’s power, and who does so by painting an eagle with bolts of lightning in its claws. Given that the eagle is Jupiter’s bird and that being able to hold bolts of lightning a superhuman feat, the image conveys the thought in a way that stating “ Jupiter is mighty” does not ( Danto 2013, p . 123).
The example, as Danto acknowledges, is “ s omewhat impoverished” ( 2013, p.123), but its bare-bones character serves to render apparent at least two important underlying functional units. On the side of the artist, she has to draw on her knowledge of mythology and of the capacities of her audience, and use such knowledge to guide the formation of the image. Elsewhere, I call this skill the “ craft of the mind” ( Walden 2022), both to distinguish it from the traditional material craft skills historically thought to be the essence of art, and to emphasize that it is at least as difficult a skill to develop as those traditional skills. On the side of the audience, they must not only possess the requisite knowledge of mythology, but as well must be prepared to recognize that the artist, by embodying meanings in a sensory medium, is enjoining them to have certain thoughts. This latter requirement is crucial, as it functions to maintain a distinction between art and advertising, and to thereby inject an ethical component into successful art.
This ethical component is highlighted in an underappreciated essay by Jerry Fodor (1 993). What, Fodor asks, distinguishes art from advertising? While these practices have in common that one party intends to effect changes in the cognitive status of another, they are distinct at least insofar as, in instances of the former, success in effecting the desired changes is not sufficient for success in the practice overall. Instead, for such success the audience must recognize that they are being enjoined to accept the (r eal or virtual) communicative intentions of the artist. Such rec-ognition, in turn, is a matter of the formation of, and adjudication between, hypotheses about those communicative intentions. An artwork is thus a sensory medium with a structure that is “ c ompatible with its having been made with the primary intention that it produce a certain effect on its audience, and that it be recognized by its audience as intended to produce that effect” ( 1 993, p. 51). Because recognition, understood in this way, is a highly cognitive process, it is one that exercises a human capacity that is at the heart of the Kantian ethical framework broadly under-stood. Whereas in successful advertising all parties may treat one another as means, in successful
Philosophy
of Photography Naturalized
225
art all parties must treat one another as ends, and it is in this respect that successful art is, if Fodor
is correct, necessarily ethical.
In this way, the artist imagined in Kant’s example will delve into their knowledge of mythology
and structure the image they produce with the anticipation that a similarly knowledgeable
audience will recognize that they are being enjoined to think about Jupiter in a certain way. This
is in contrast to an imagined advertiser who, let us say, uses an indiscernible image to cause their
audience to develop a certain desire, perhaps a desire to purchase a new model of electric car. In
both cases, one party attempts to effect changes in the cognitive status of another party, but only
in the former case do the success conditions require awareness of the character of the project. The
advertiser has succeeded in their task even if their audience is none the wiser about what is going
on; the artist has not.
Finally, it will be objected that the complex cognitive structures to which Fodor draws our
attention are not the sorts of lower- level functional units that the Aristotlean has in mind when
seeking engineering knowledge. Quasi- Gricean communicative reflexive conditions are a far cry
from, say, the rack-and-pinion assemblies normally associated with the interests of an engineer. But
while I grant this, we should not let it obscure essential similarities. In his understanding of art,
Danto draws our attention to a very high-level sociological function, one that we should expect to
be resolved into immediately lower-level psychological functional units, and Fodor’s offered reflexive
condition looks to be a good candidate in this latter regard. In principle, this reflexive condition
could be resolved into more basic neurological functions, functions that might seem more of interest
to an engineer, but the philosopher of art would likely be no more interested in these than a student
tasked with learning a h igh- level software function would be interested in how it is realized,
ultimately, in the logic gates and transistors of the computer on which the software is running. Philosophers
of art are thus engineers, but given that in all domains of engineering there is a division
of labor, with the operation of the most basic functions understood by one group and the h igherlevel
functions by another, we should expect no less in a suitably naturalized philosophy of art.
References
Costello, Diarmuid. 2017. “ What’s So New About the “ New” Theory of Photography?” The Journal of Aesthetic
and Art Criticism 75: 439–452.
Costello, Diarmuid. 2018. On Photography: A Philosophical Inquiry. New York: Routledge.
Danto, Arthur. 1998. “ The Naked Truth.” In Jerrold Levinson ( ed.) Aesthetics and Ethics: Essays at the Intersection,
pp. 257–282. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Danto, Arthur. 2013. What Art Is. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Fodor, Jerry. 1993. “ D éjà vu All Over Again: How Danto’s Aesthetics Recapitulates the Philosophy of
Mind”. In Mark Rollins ( ed.) Danto and His Critics, pp. 41–54. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Scruton, Roger. 1981. “ Photography and Representation.” Critical Inquiry 7: 577–603.
Scruton, Roger. 2009. “ Replies to Critics.” The British Journal of Aesthetics 49: 451–461.
Walden, Scott. 2016. “Transparency and Two-Factor Photographic Appreciation.” The British Journal of
Aesthetics 56: 33–51.
Walden, Scott. 2022. “ P hotography and Danto’s Craft of the Mind.” In Lydia Goehr and Jonathan Gilmore
(eds.) A Companion to Arthur C. Danto. Cambridge, pp. 223–232. MA: Wiley-Blackwell Publishing.
Walton, Kendall L. 1984. “ T ransparent Pictures: On the Nature of Photographic Realism.” Critical Inquiry
11: 246–277.
Walton, Kendall L. 2007. “Aesthetics-What? Why? and Wherefore?” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
65: 147–161.
Walton, Kendall L. 2008. “ Postscripts to ‘ Transparent Pictures’.” In Kendall L. Walton ( ed.) Marvelous
Images: On Values and the Arts, pp. 110–116. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, Dawn. 2021. “ Invisible Images and Indeterminacy: Why We Need a M ulti- stage Account of Photography.”
The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 79: 161–174.
226
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-29
23
PAINTING AND SCULPTURE IN THEIR RELATION TO
ARCHITECTURE
Carole Talon- Hugon
“Painting and sculpture are naturally attached to the building and […] cannot be separated from
it without danger”, wrote Alain (1920). The idea of a primitive union is historically indisputable
and has been emphasized by many authors, but there are a thousand ways to “be tied”, and we will
see the different forms that this bond can take. But this link can also be broken, and indeed it was
during the period of architectural modernism. The whole question is to know if this disunity is,
as Alain says, “a
peril”. What do painting and sculpture on the one hand, and architecture on the
other have to gain and lose from this emancipation? What is playing behind this debate?
1 Coincidence, Adhesion, Reunion
Looked at from a certain angle, painting and sculpture are intrinsically linked to architecture. I
am not talking about those works “which
hold the middle between architecture and sculpture”
of which Hegel speaks in his Esthétique: Obelisk or alley of the sphinxes of Luxor, Colossi of
Memnon in Thebes, to which we could add the extravagant Ideal Palace in Hauterives (France),
produced by a postman named Cheval who, between 1879 and 1912, built it by assembling pebbles
collected during his tours (Figure 23.1). All these buildings have in common that they “carry
their
meaning within themselves”, as Hegel says, in other words, not to pursue a positive goal. None are
inhabitable, including Cheval’s Ideal Palace which, if hollow, has only narrow stairs and corridors.
All these constructions are nevertheless architectural in their imposing proportions or their architectural layout. Their nature is so indistinct that talking about them about painting and sculpture
related to architecture is inappropriate. There is no connection where there is indistinction.
To speak of the intrinsic connection of painting and sculpture to architecture makes full sense,
however, if we consider these two elements which are part of architecture: polychromy and
ornamentation.
With the exception of only two eras, the Classical Age and the 20th century, polychromy has
been an important component of architecture throughout its history. It has been known since the
19th century that the whiteness of temples and Greek statuary, like that of medieval cathedrals,
is not that of their initial state, but the product of the discoloration caused by time. Quatremère
de Quincy was one of the first to reconstruct the original appearance of ancient works using ancient texts and, studying the colossal chryselephantine cult statues of Phidias, he established for
the first time in his Olympian Jupiter (1815)
the polychromy of Greek art. The so- called “natural”
polychromy is based on the use of materials of different colors, such as gold and ivory in the statue
of Phidias, but the so- called “artificial” polychromy is based on the use of paint. The tradition
Painting and Sculpture in Their Relation to Architecture
227
continued without interruption until the classical age, and we still see in the 12th century in the
interiors of Cluniac, Gothic or Cistercian churches, the beautiful cut stones constituting the walls,
covered with colors and false joints. The space of these buildings is not only an organization of
three- dimensional forms but “ an illusionist construction to which colored effects lead” ( Recht,
2016) which sometimes underline its structure, sometimes modify the perception of it.
The sculpture also touches the building intimately through the sculpted decoration. Vitruvius
considered this to be an integral part of architecture. Its incorporation can be read on several
levels. First in the structural elements of buildings: columns, architraves, cornices, entablatures
or pediments; but also in what Vitruvius calls the “ analogous” ornaments: in the triglyphs which
punctuate the frieze, and in which the columns of the temple are repeated analogically, or in the
Corinthian capitals whose carved foliage beckons toward the branches of the trunks of trees used
in the primitive hut. The intimacy of sculpture and architecture can also be read in the s o- called
“ variety” ornaments, that is to say in the ornamental treatment of certain structural elements of a
building ( modenature), which highlight its plastic. And finally, in the s o- c alled “ allegorical” ornaments:
sculpted metopes, crossettes, lobes, volutes, figured ornaments, masks, foliage, branches,
rafters, trophies, glory, etc.
The Classical Age reaffirms the intimate correlation of architecture and ornament— and consequently
of its connection to all forms of painting and sculpture contained in buildings. Architecture
is architecture only when its necessary elements, the floor, the wall, the roofing, are not
left to their sole functionality. This can be seen in particular in the nomenclature used in the 16th
century by Philibert de l’ Orme, which ranks alongside small “ accessory ornaments” ( cartouches,
cabling columns, rings which surround their barrels, etc.), “ major ornaments” what are the columns
( Philibert de l’Orme, 1567).
Painted or carved, the ornament is not a superfluous addition; it is a completion that completes
the whole and gives it its full presence. The ornamentation of the architectural organism is the
most intimate form of the presence of painting and sculpture in architecture.
The fact remains that it is not so much to the fluting of the columns, to their sculpted capitals,
or to the brackets, lobes and volutes, that we first think of when we say the word sculpture. It is not
first of all the blue vault studded with stars of the nave of the church of St Germain- des- near Paris,
or the painted geometric decoration of its columns ( Figure 23.2), that first evokes for us the word
painting. It is, however, applied pigments, modeled marble. Moreover, in the Middle Ages, the one
who chiseled stone was not a sculptor, but a stonemason; and the one who applied the colors was not
a painter, but a polychromator. It should be added that during this same medieval period, there was
no more architect in the modern sense ( p ost- r enaissance) of the word, that is to say in the sense of
a person exercising a liberal profession, responsibility for a global mission ranging from the project
management to the control of its realization on the site. Until the 12th century, the direction of
Figure
23.1
Carole Talon-Hugon
228
the construction work was entrusted to an experienced mason, appointed master builder, who
was almost always anonymous as were stonemasons and polychromators. So here we have another
form of intimate link between painting and sculpture and architecture, but which is not yet that
of three singular and specific arts.
However, it is the latter that is referred to when the building houses frescoes, paintings, altarpieces, and sculptures in the round. Until the advent of abstraction, all of these objects shared
their iconic dimension. In the Middle Ages, painters and sculptors were united in the corporations
of “painters and image cutters”. The intimacy of these two arts with architecture then takes on
another form.
A borderline case between adhesion and reunion is, for sculpture, that of column statues, a
very fine example of which can be seen on the porch of Chartres cathedral (Figure 23.3). The
human figure is integrated into it to the point of contributing to the structure; the bodies, in three
dimensions, are taken from the volume of the column. The figuration of the figures and the architectural requirements are fused into each other, forming something that is neither quite a column
nor quite a human body.
Another borderline case, but for painting this time, is that of the fresco, which is inseparable
from the wall, but which, by the image represented, opens the latter, as we see beautifully in the
painted Upper Basilica of Assisi by Giotto. All the scenes from the life of Saint Francis of Assisi are
placed in the movement of a fictitious architecture made of projections, consoles, columns, even
a coffered ceiling; in other words, the scene occurs in the dynamics of architectural lines in harmony with the building. This architectural illusion of Giotto was celebrated in the 15th century
by Alberti, who describes the mural as an “open
window” to the outside.
In the case of the fresco as in that of the column statue, the image adds to the architecture its
own virtues, while remaining physically linked to it. It stands out when dealing with statues in
the round which, unlike bas- reliefs and high-
reliefs, is no longer attached to a background, and
when the image becomes a painting. The statue of the Virgin on the central pedestal of the portal
of Strasbourg Cathedral ( 12th– 15th century), the Grünewald altarpiece intended for the high altar
of the Issenheim preceptory church (c. 1515) are detached from the architecture. Even if they are
sealed to their medium, works of this type can, without losing their integrity, be detached from it
(and,
indeed, very often they have been).Figure 23.2
Painting and Sculpture in Their Relation to Architecture
229
Figure
23.3
These are the different forms of integration. Noticing them and classifying them is one thing;
considering their raison d’être is another. As we will see, these different forms of integration of
painting and sculpture into architecture are not only topographical; they are above all functional.
2 Functional Integration
Two main types of purposes justify the integration of painting and sculpture in architecture: to
embellish and to make meaningful.
2.1 Embellish
Because “ beauty is a very noble thing”, it is very desirable and “ must be sought first”, wrote
Alberti. Conversely, “ where the work hurts by its inelegance, having satisfied the need appears
insignificant and negligible, and having ensured convenience, unpleasant”. In addition, he notes,
beauty “ alone provides the greatest support to the convenience and even to the longevity of
buildings” ( Alberti, 1485). But the value of the beautification does not lie only in the pleasure it
produces in those who frequent the premises, or in the practical advantages that Alberti points out.
From an ontological point of view and no longer a psychological one, embellishment is a completion
and an accomplishment of the edifice. If, for Vitruvius, ornament is, along with proportion,
one of the two hallmarks of architecture, it is because to embellish is to complete creation and
give the world its venustas.
In The Seven Lamps of Architecture, Ruskin also justifies the embellishment of religious buildings
from another point of view: by the honor that is due to the divine. This is the lamp of sacrifice:
to offer beautiful buildings, made of precious materials, infinitely expensive in terms of labor and
k now- how, is to honor God or the gods. The magnificence of the decorated building is there
to signify worship more than to arouse admiration. The Gothic Cathedral is a total work of art
in which the creative works of thousands of anonymous people have collectively celebrated the
Carole Talon-
Hugon
230
sacred ( Ruskin, 1849). It is in a very close sense that Vitruvius affirmed that the temple has duties
toward the God it shelters:
The temples of Minerva, Mars and Hercules will be of the Doric order, because virtue of
these divinities has a gravity which is repugnant to the delicacy of other orders; whereas
Venus, Flore, Proserpina and the Nymphs of the fountains must have a Corinthian order,
especially as the kindness of the flowers, foliage and volutes with which this order is embellished,
seems very suitable to the delicacy of these goddesses. This contributes a lot to decorum,
such as making the temples of Juno, Diana, Bacchus and other gods of this species, of
the Ionic order, because the mediocrity of this order lies between the severity of the Doric,
and the delicacy of the Corinthian, fairly well represents the particular nature of these deities.
( Vitruve, 1st BC)
It is not only religious buildings, but also all edifices, civil or military, that ornamentation gives
their highest value. Alberti thus affirmed:
The price that our ancestors, men of great wisdom, had thought it necessary to grant to him is
measured by the incredible care which they spent so that all the institutions, and in particular
legal, military and religious, as well as the whole of public affairs, were perfectly adorned:
they seemed to have wanted to understand that deprived of the pageantry and pomp of adornments,
these institutions without which the life of men could hardly exist would be reduced
to insipid and insipid activities.
(Alberti, 1485)
Embellishment is quite another thing than a frills or blush. Far from being a deceptive make- up,
the ornamentation is an increase in the potency of the adorned thing.
2.2 Make Meaningful
The second purpose of integrating painting and sculpture into architecture is to contribute to
the meaning and function of the building. What the building signifies is its destination and the
painted and sculpted images help to manifest it. In large classical buildings, they make the building
speak, they fix its meaning.
The large painted and sculpted religious groups from the Middle Ages ( we should add the
stained- glass windows, mosaics, pavements, etc.) are veritable theological sums. Churches and
cathedrals are stone Bibles that educate and edify the illiterate by showing them more or less
symbolically scenes from the Old and New Testaments and from the history of Christianity ( lives
of saints, martyrs, etc.). Gregory the Great maintains that painting allows “ to learn, through the
history it relates, what to adore, to learn […]; in it the ignorant see what to do; in it, can read those
who do not know the alphabet” ( Gregory the Great, c. 600). The carvings on their porches often
represent local saints who greet the faithful on the doorstep of the church and act as intercessors
with members of the Holy Trinity. The representations of deadly sins move souls. Icons are supports
for prayer and meditation.
The great classical civil buildings are just as telling. The effigies of illustrious men found there,
writes Alberti, are there to “ invite [to] imitate their virtues” ( Alberti, 1485). The allegorical representations
of virtues, as in the fresco in the Doge’s Palace in Venice, Time and the virtues freed
from evil and envy ( 1550– 1560) painted by Gian Battista Zelotti, are intended to remind men of
their homework. The large fresco by Ambogio Lorenzetti, The Effects of Good Government (1337–
1340), in the Communal Palace of Siena by, which represents the personified virtues, the honored
Painting
and Sculpture in Their Relation to Architecture
231
virtuous citizens and the vanquished vicious citizens, is intended to bring those who frequent the
Palace around common values. In the Boston Public Library ( 1848), the head of Minerva, goddess
of Wisdom, sculpted by Saint- G audens and Mora, the allegorical statues of Science and Art made
by Bela Pratt, the eight panels by Puvis de Chavanne representing Philosophy, Astronomy, History,
Chemistry, Physics, Pastoral Poetry, Dramatic Poetry and Epic Poetry, remind us that the
place is a temple of knowledge. The large fresco on the facade of the Palace of Culture in Dresden
in the former GDR is one of the many examples of the propaganda functions of socialist realism.
Sculpted or painted, images in architecture have had, and sometimes continue to have, meanings
and functions, be they magical, religious, ethical or political. They are intended to arouse
certain emotions, to direct the mind toward certain thoughts, to dispose those who frequent the
place to certain behaviors. They are not only beautifying; they are mediators of meanings. They
contribute to the impression that the monument is intended to produce and reinforce its affective,
cognitive and behavioral effects.
Location and destination are linked: here we are dealing with works in situ, indissolubly situated
and intended.
3 Modernist Isolationism
To all forms of more or less intimate collaboration, from painting and sculpture to architecture,
there is a form of modernist isolationism. This consists in arguing that far from serving architecture,
sculpture and painting harm it. In 1927, the architect and art critic Jean Baldovici said:
It is architecture that must be its own decoration. The play of lines and colors must be such,
respond so exactly to the requirements of the interior atmosphere, that any detached painting,
any painting, appears not only useless, but detrimental to the harmony of the whole.
(Baldovici, 1929)
Mondrian wanted the paintings to be turned over on the wall so as not to break the unity of the
architecture ( Mondrian, 1959). Moreover, in Mallet- Stevens’ Villa Noailles in Hyères, the paintings
are not hung on the walls but stored in cupboards.
As we will see, this isolationism is the result of the convergence of three distinct, albeit fundamentally
linked, evolutions, the first concerning architecture, the second, painting and sculpture,
and the third all the arts.
3.1 Architectural Functionalism
Already in the 18th century, Laugier wanted to reform architecture by putting it under the authority
of reason. Not only against the decorative overloads of baroque and rococo buildings, but
also against Vitruvius who gave ornamentation the founding place we have just recalled, Laugier
advocated a return to the primitive hut and wanted to refocus architecture on its elementary components:
pillar, beam, opening. According to him, architecture is above all the art of construction
( fabrica). So much so that the shapes of the buildings as well as their ornaments must derive from
the sole logic of the construction. It is in the name of this principle that Laugier criticizes the use
of triangular pediments on the facades of buildings in Place de la Concorde ( Paris) designed by
Jacques Gabriel: these are only admitted if they correspond on the two sides of a roof, which in
this case is not the case in these buildings where they have only a decorative purpose. By his declarations,
Laugier announces the constructive rationalism of Viollet- le- Duc. However, the rationalism
of these two architects does not make them strict functionalists: they are indeed functionalists,
insofar as they consider that architecture must aim above all at utility; but their functionalism is
Carole
Talon-
Hugon
232
not strict insofar as they attach great importance to the decor of the building, provided that this
comes after the structure, and that it is adapted to the functions of the building.
Much more radical are modern functionalisms, from the Bauhaus to Le Corbusier, which,
for their part, want forms to flow from functions. In 1931, Adolf Loos launched a virulent
critical charge against ornament in his manifestly titled Ornament and Crime. Le Corbusier’s
pamphlet Decorative Art Today follows the same logic: the decor is only a camouflage that conceals
the mediocrity of the products; the “ styles” are absurd parasitic ornamentations, and the
decorative objects bulky, ridiculous and dishonest knickknacks, “ moth- eaten defrocks” ( Le
Corbusier, 1925).
A closer look at these texts reveals that their criticism of ornamentation does not mean the
sacrifice of beauty on the altar of functionality. Beauty has simply migrated to the side of useful,
rational, hygienic and “ true” forms; for Le Corbusier, on the side of simple geometric shapes
adapted to the human scale by the Modulor, this universal measurement system which should make
it possible to structure the architecture as well as the furniture and the human space of the city.
Architectural beauty must be born from it:
The architect, writes Le Corbusier, by the arrangement of forms, achieves an order which is
a pure creation of his mind; through forms, it intensely affects our senses, provoking plastic
emotions; through the relationships it creates, it awakens deep emotions in us, it gives us the
measure of an order that we feel is in accordance with that of the world, it determines various
movements of our mind and our heart; that’s when we feel the beauty.
( Le Corbusier, 1925)
What then does the great novelty consist of ? In the refusal to make ornament, in all the pictorial
and sculptural forms that we have seen, an integral part of architecture. These switch to decoration,
understood as superfluous, superfluous and parasitic addition. Beauty value is retained, but
functionality must follow.
However, modernist architectural functionalism refuses significance without recycling it
elsewhere. The meanings which, as we have seen, are added to the ornamental function of
painting and sculpture in architecture, vanish with the disappearance of this type of contribution.
As Venturi writes, “ modern architects have abandoned an iconological tradition in which
painting, sculpture and graphics combined with architecture [and where] delicate hieroglyphics
on a massive pylon, archetypal inscriptions on architecture. Roman, the mosaic processions,
the portals, the frescoes all contain messages” ( Venturi, 1979). We no longer want “ talking”
buildings.
3.2 The Emancipation of Painting and Sculpture
In fact, divorce is not the result of architecture alone. If painting and sculpture were originally
attached to the building in all the aspects that we have just seen, from the end of the Middle Ages
a slow movement of emancipation gradually detached them from it. During the 14th century,
the belonging of a work to a building ( religious or not) and its function in it is no longer its only
regime of existence. Paintings and sculptures sometimes leave the places for which they were
designed to be sold. A new type of market ( on spec) for works appears, in which works are no
longer made to order but produced upstream and offered in a market or fair. The client succeeds
the former sponsor. By entering the market circuits for private, and later public, collections, the
work emancipates itself from both its place and its function. The great historical movement of empowerment
has started which, at the height of the Renaissance, will allow painting and sculpture
Painting and Sculpture in Their Relation to Architecture
233
to access, in the words of art historian Theodor Hetzer, their “ sovereignty”. This movement t
empower the arts has obviously not prevented sublime collaborations, as the vivid testimony o
Baroque architecture shows. But when the arts were thought of under the category of fine arts
the beautiful became their preeminent value (“ the highest aim of art at the same time as its ver
center”, Winckelmann said ( Winckelmann, 1765)), and soon their exclusive value, as we see it i
particular in Lessing who wanted “ that the name of a work of art should be applied only to thos
where the artist has been able to truly show himself as such, that is to say where the beauty wa
her one and only goal”( Lessing, 1766). Educating and edifying then become parasitic aims. Th
theories of art for the sake of the 19th century proclaim it vehemently: “ art for us is not the mean
but the end”. Art should not concern itself with anything outside of its own sphere; the work mus
be its own goal. In short, it must be autotelic, therefore d e- functionalized.
Such sovereignty of the arts in general, and of painting and sculpture in particular, comes into
tension with the decorative and significant functions attributed to them. Because what is sovereign
is not in view of anything other than itself. To embellish or to make meaningful a building, is not
this to be reduced to an ancillary status?
3.3 The Formalist Becoming of the Arts
The formalistic development of the arts also plays a role in modernist isolationism. Konra
Fiedler, who was its most remarkable theorist, asserted that form is “ the material of which th
work is made”, so that in the work of art “ it is the form itself which must constitute that in whic
the work of art exists”. When the form becomes “ pure expression of itself”, it is necessary brea
with all the aesthetics of the content. Both with naturalism and with symbolism, because bot
share the mistaken belief that painting refers to something other than the pictoriality of th
painting: to natural realities in one case, to spiritual realities in the other. An apologist of pur
visibility, Fiedler, asserts that “ seeing comes to itself, so to speak, when the relation to the objec
has disappeared” ( Fiedler, 1887). He provided the theoretical framework for the formal criticis
which triumphed at the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th, with Roger Fry, Cliv
Bell or Clement Greenberg.
However, the concern for form is declined differently according to the arts. All share the
rejection of any content and any heteronomous aim, but each has its specific form. Music, says
Hanslick, must remain “ unrelated to a sphere of foreign e xtra- m usical ideas”, and be pure sound
architecture: “i t is made up of combinations and sound forms which have no other subject than
themselves” ( Hanslick, 1854). Roger Fry makes the value of painting reside, not by forms in the
service of contents that painting shares with other representative arts, but by its pure elements:
the rhythm and the line which delimits the forms, the mass, the space, color ( Fry, 1909). More
radically, Greenberg made flatness the ultimate culmination of the paint purification process
( Greenberg, 1964). The growing concern for pictoriality in the circles of painting, that of musicality
in the world of music as well as that of literarity in the literary field appear as the effective
history of the progressive conquest of this purity of art.
The concern for the pure form thus means for each art the concern for its specific form. Eac
one must “ develop the expressive possibilities of [his] medium”.
Formalism means the disappearance of significance, hence one of the two reasons for the presence
of painting and sculpture in architecture, and reinforces the process of empowerment of the
arts considered above. But he adds an essential point for our purpose: the autonomy is no longer
only that of the artistic sphere in relation to what is not itself ( politics, religion, power, ethics…),
but those of the different arts in relation to each other. This is summed up very well by Venturi’s
formula: “ you don’t paint on a Mies” (V enturi, 1979).
o
f
,
y
n
e
s
e
s
t
d
e
h
k
h
e
e
t
m
e
h
Carole Talon-Hugon
234
4 Beyond Isolationism: Homology, Analogies, Confusions
And yet, at the same time that the formalist evolution of the arts toward their specific essences
added to the reasons for the divorce of architecture from painting and sculpture, it paradoxically
contributed, on another level, to their rapprochement.
Something in fact unites these three arts: their common belonging to the category of plastic
arts, that is to say their common distance with regard to the language arts which, by nature, are
less apt to renounce the meaning. Clive Bell argues that the quality common and particular to all
members of this subgroup of the fine arts is what he calls “signifying form”. Signifying form, and
not signifying content, which he defines as “[t] he relations of all these signifying forms which
constitute the plastic arts. But we must go further. Inside all the significant forms that make up the
plastic arts (“Saint
Sophia and the stained glass windows of Chartres, Mexican sculpture, a Persian
vase, Chinese carpets, frescoes by Giotto in Padua and masterpieces by Poussin, Piero de la Francesca or Cézanne”) (Bell,
1904), painting, sculpture and architecture are united by a more precise
common denominator: space. The two- dimensional space which is not only of the wall but also
of the canvas; the three- dimensional space worked by the architect as well as by the sculptor.
During the Renaissance, Alberti united painting, sculpture and architecture under the unifying category of drawing arts, the word disegno meaning both the outline and the project. The
community formed by the three arts was symbolically marked by the three brother works that
Alberti devoted to them: De pictura (1435–
1437), De statua (c. 1445), De re ædificatoria (1452–
1472), and it found its institutional translation in the creation, in Florence in 1563, of the first Accademia delle Arti del Disegno where these three arts were taught. At the start of the 20th century, architecture was rather becoming an art of space. Loos clearly marks his departure from tradition: architecture, he writes, is “the art of space and form (unlike design which seeks to refer architecture to
the graphic arts)” (Loos,
1931).
For its part, the historical evolution of painting led it toward the plan. After Manet, the crisis
of representation and the refusal of the illusionist rendering of perceptual vision mean that the
painting is no longer a window. Its two- dimensionality is assumed and claimed. Flatness and the
delineation of flatness are its essence. As we read in the first issue of the review De Stijl, “modern
painting transforms corporeality into flatness and, by the destruction of the natural, reduced in
terms of plane, by the understanding of space, it attains spatial relations” (1917). At the same time,
the abandonment of corporeality in sculpture makes volume its principle. By the plan and the
volume, the three arts converge toward the same geometrical place.
The conditions were in place for architecture no longer to include paintings and statues, but to
make itself sculpture and painting.
In the German Pavilion designed by Mies van der Rohe for the Barcelona International Exhibition in 1929, the building becomes a sculpture. Architecture affirms the sculptural and plastic
properties of its components. Richard Döcker’s Lichthaus Luz in Stuttgart (1928)
piles up volumes
projecting from its balconies as in Donald Judd’s Stacks. The row of houses created by J J P Oud
in Stuttgart in 1927 uses the sculptural technique of serialization.
Architecture is also painted, in several senses. First, when she transposes the canvas to the size
of the building, as seen with J JP Oud’s café De Unie in Rotterdam (1925)
( Figure 23.4), the facade
of which becomes an oversized painting. But also in the sense that it attaches unprecedented importance to the sensitive grain of its surfaces, to the properties of its materials, of its coverings that
make up its walls. So, Loos, who advocates a stripped down and almost ascetic architecture, pays
particular attention to materials. The architect Henrik Petrus Berlage requested that the wall be
shown in its nakedness and in all “its smooth beauty”. The absence of decorative elements causes
interest to shift to the optical quality of surfaces which can be smooth, irregular, satin, grainy,
silky, etc. Nikolaus Pevsner is right to see in this new sensibility of architects at the beginning
Painting and Sculpture in Their Relation to Architecture
235
Figure
23.4
of the 20th century and to walls and flat surfaces the paradoxical consequence of the rationalist
rejection of ornament ( Pevsner, 1949).
By renouncing sculptural and pictorial ornament, architecture, as Venturi puts it (V enturi,
1979), has become its own ornament.
For its part, painting affirms its proximity to architecture: “ painting is architectural today,
because in itself and with its own means, it serves the same concept: space and plan”, we read in
the first of the review De Stijl. In Dr. Barnes’s private museum in Philadelphia, Matisse transposed
the easel painting to the scale of the building. Fernand Léger saw in this widening the future of
abstract art, which, he writes, “ is in difficulty when he wants to make easel painting [but whose]
possibilities are limitless for the mural” (L éger, 1996). Going even further, Mondrian wanted not
only that the painting leaves the canvas for the wall, but that it merges and dissolves in the architecture:
“t he a bstract- r ealistic painting can disappear as soon as we can transfer its plastic beauty
around. from us by the color division of the room” ( Mondrian, 1959). As for the minimalist sculpture
of the 1960s, it tends toward architecture with its taste for the colossal. L’X by Ronald Bladen
(1965), or Playground by Tony Smith (1 966) explore massiveness and, in doing so, share with the
architectural edifice the fact of not being able to be embraced with a single glance and of associating
visual sensations and kinesthetics. At the end of the 1960s, J esus- R afael Soto’s Les Pénétrables,
with their vertically hanging nylons that have no other limits than those of the space that houses
it, embraced the architecture: as in the latter, one was no longer in front of the work but moved
within it. In the 1920s, El Lissitsky already presented his Prouns as “ way stations” between architecture,
painting and also sculpture. And indeed, these three-d imensional forms which float in
space without bottom or top are stagings of space.
Such a fusion of painting, sculpture and architecture beckons toward the ideal of the total work
of art. But Gesamtkunstwerke’s program of modernity is very different from that achieved by the
cooperation of the arts in the medieval cathedral: painting, sculpture and architecture can come
together not in the perspective of a common purpose, but instead of their common denominator:
the space which, when it is plane, sometimes becomes a wall and a picture, and which, when it is
three- dimensional, becomes a statue or a building.
Carole Talon-
Hugon
236
5 For the Meeting
The relationships that painting and sculpture have with architecture are fundamentally driven by the evolution of the idea of art. As the needle of the seismograph translates invisible tectonic movements, the forms of their relations over the course of history visibly translate states of the idea of art and the debates that configure them: destined works versus sovereign works, functionalism versus autotelia, contenuism versus formalism, significance versus aisthesis.
The presence of painting and sculpture in architecture thwarts the modern idea of art in several ways, all of which stem from the fact that in building, painting or sculpture is in a world that in-cludes them. A topographical and functional dependence which contradicts the modern idea that a work of art is to itself its own world, obeys only its own inner necessity, has no function, and is its own end. According to these principles, the work included in the architecture becomes accessory, functional and intended. It falls into the degrading category of the applied arts, an adjective which clearly indicates their additive character.
But being casual doesn’t mean being superfluous and dispensable. To confer an additional being ( of beauty, of significance) to the building is to confer on it a form of accomplishment and
Figure
23.6
Figure
23.5
Painting and Sculpture in Their Relation to Architecture
237
increased power. The “peril” Alain referred to in the quote that opens this article, means first of
all a loss for architecture; but undoubtedly also a loss for sculpture and painting. Without going
like Ruskin, until seeing in what he calls portable art “a
mark of degradation” (Ruskin, 1859),
it can be said that in situ works derive part of their strength and power from their environment.
A final example will show it. In the recently restored Hôtel Richer de Belleval in Montpellier
(France), 17th-
century plasterwork, painted decorations from the 18th century, and works newly
created for the place by contemporary artists come together. Abdelkader Benchama’s India ink
drawings on the sides of the ridge vaults of some rooms develop their power at the same time as
they give the ceiling an airy beauty ( Figure 23.5). The panels made of tens of thousands of scarab
elytra assembled by Jan Fabre on the ceiling of another room ( Figure 23.6) adorn the building at
the same time as they make it significant, since objects and symbols are represented therein, make
a sign toward the past of the building and that of the city (a
symbol of union recalls that this room
was a wedding hall, a caduceus echoes the fact that the Faculty of Medicine of Montpellier is the
oldest in Europe). The remarkable plastic beauty of these panels does not suffer from their significance but rather is enhanced by them. The two works cited guarantee to be in this building a scale
and a noticeable resonance. So the “peril” of separating painting and sculpture on the one hand,
and architecture on the other, may well be that of the loss of reciprocal potentiation.
238 DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-30
24
PAINTING AND THEATE
Susan L. Feagin
R
This chapter addresses some relationships between painting as an art and theatrical performance
as an art. In particular, I discuss roles of painting in theatrical set design, mainly as painted
scenery and as a substitute for what the painting represents. Painting is generally construed as a
two- d imensional image or design produced by the application of a fluid medium to a relatively
extended flat surface, such as a wall, panel, or stretched canvas— though, as we shall see, construing
painting as t wo- d imensional will prove to be problematic. Theater is often understood to
include a broad range of types of e vents— s uch as parades, processions, puppet shows, opera, circus
acts, carnivals, stand- u p comedy, and sports. My concern here is with theatrical performance in
a narrower sense, where people ( or their surrogates, such as puppets) represent persons and events
live, in virtue of their voice and movement, before a live audience.
From a global and historical perspective, painted scenery has figured only marginally in theatrical
performance. The exception is from about 1500 to 1900 in Western Europe when, theater
historians tell us, the conventions of painting dominated theater set design.1 First, the proscenium
arch functioned like a frame around the stage, so watching a performance was like looking at a
picture. Second, “ scenery was usually designed by the leading painters and architects of the day,”
and, in courses of study, “ scenic design was long an adjunct of architecture or painting.”2 And
third, set design employed popular forms and styles of p ainting— m ost importantly, geometrical
perspective drawing techniques for creating the illusion of space. For example, various perspective
techniques developed by Baldassarre Peruzzi were codified in Sebastiano Serlio’s Second Book of
Architecture ( 1545), a practical manual partly devoted to theater design. Serlio designed o ne- point
perspective backdrops to serve generically for each of three different kinds of plays: tragedy, comedy,
and satire. One scholar goes so far as to claim that in the European tradition, set design “ was
born from the treatises on perspective.”3
One might initially think, as I did, that insofar as the conventions of painting as an art dominated
the production of sets, the conception of theatrical performance as an art would be enhanced.
But I was wrong. According to what I take to be the received view, the dominance of
painting over set design actually worked in the opposite direction. In brief, the inherent t wodimensionality
of the painted image or design was in basic tension with the real space of the stage.
It thus failed to perform one of the fundamental functions of sets, which is to organize threedimensional
stage space, or acting space, for the performers. Instead, it actually undermined the
artistic unity of the whole.
I don’t dispute the received view, though a couple of details give me pause. Painting is not just
the creation of a t wo- d imensional image, and its role in theatrical performance may not be merely
Painting and Theater
239
as a painted backdrop as an object of visual attention. A painting is a material creation that is positioned
in and occupies real space. As such, it can serve as what the art historian David Summers
calls a “ real metaphor,” that is, as a substitute for the object depicted, transforming the space into
one where certain actions are made appropriate. My aim here is to show how, under this more
robust conception of painting, it may better serve some of the functions of set design and mitigate
the tensions between real and represented space.
In Section 1, I discuss the physicality of painting, the importance of positioning within and
occupation of space, and Summers’s notion of real metaphor. In Section 2, I describe three functions
of sets and how the more robust understanding of painting provides a fuller understanding
of the ways they may be satisfied. In Section 3, I look at a fourth function of sets, the focus of the
“ received view,” which is to organize or structure the acting space. In Section 4, I consider some
examples of pictures used as “ real metaphors” in contrast with painted scenery, and how they can
organize stage space and rationalize actor movement. They serve more like props and notably do
not prompt tension between the t wo- dimensional image and three- dimensional stage space.
1 Painting as Two- Dimensional
Let us construe painting as the application of a fluid medium to a relatively extended flat surface,
such as a wall, panel, or stretched canvas, to produce an image or design. Much philosophical
work is concerned with just the t wo- d imensional image— t he nature of pictures, or pictorial
representation— such as what makes something a picture of a chair, or of a glass that has been
filled with water, or of the Battle of Gettysburg. But in fact, a painting is much more than a
two- d imensional image and not merely an object of visual attention. Paint and paintings are
three- d imensional. Visible brush strokes and impasto can create sensuous, even tactile, effects.
Paint is often applied in multiple, visible l ayers— e.g., by scumbling and glazing— occasionally
unintentionally revealing pentimenti, images in lower layers that become visible due to the increasing
transparency of oil paint in the upper layers over time. The surface onto which the paint
is applied may be chosen for its texture that remains visible in the final product, such as the pattern
of the weave of the canvas. Elevations and depressions in a surface may be important to the
representational content or overall effect of the painted image, such as with many ceramics and
cave paintings.4
Though paint is applied to a surface, it doesn’t always remain there. In Helen Frankenthaler’s
stain paintings, the paint seeps into the canvas; fresco painting penetrates wet plaster. Watercolor
and ink painters struggle with and exploit the graphic effects of absorption and diffusion of the liquid
medium. Aesthetically, our appreciation of such works involves understanding both the fact of
absorption into the surface or material support and the difference it makes to what was achieved.
Such factors cannot be ignored when understanding the status of painting as an art. And although
the physicality and t hree- dimensionality of painting do not have great impact in the theater, they
reinforce a painting’s material presence, its positioning within and occupation of space, setting up
spatial relations to actors, stage props, and audiences. Exclusive concentration on what a picture
represents, the content of an image, neglects the physicality and three- d imensionality of painting.5
Paintings may have crucial relationships to their surrounding spaces and the human bodies
that occupy them. Even if construed as two- dimensional, they are positioned in space: they have
location. Careful positioning of many kinds of paintings— e specially anamorphic images, and
paintings to be hung along staircases, on ceilings, or toward the top of high w alls— i s necessary to
experience some of their most important aesthetic and artistic effects. Maximal appreciation of a
painting may be achieved only at a given distance, or within a certain range of distances.6
Further, paintings on curved or angled surfaces are not merely located or positioned in space but
occupy space; they extend in three dimensions and relate physically to ( other) t hree- dimensional
Susan
L. Feagin
240
entities. Their relevant aesthetic and artistic effects are not dependent merely on color, form, and
the representational content of a t wo- d imensional image, but on the space they create. Walking
into a Byzantine church that contains its original painting covering the entire surface of the walls
and ceilings is like walking into another world.
Because images are positioned in and occupy space, they can make up for what David Summers,
following the 1 6th- century theorist Gabriele Paleotti, calls “ the defect of distance.”7 Distance
is a defect in that distant objects do not have the power they would have if they were present.
A painting can make up for this defect of distance by serving as a substitute for what it depicts,
making it “ present” here and now, by occupying real space. This is what Summers calls a real metaphor.
As a substitute, the painting transforms the space into a place where certain kinds of actions
are appropriate— at least some actions that would have been directed toward or appropriate ( or inappropriate)
in the presence of the depicted object for which it substitutes. Importantly, the degree
of visual resemblance between the image and what it substitutes for is irrelevant to its effectiveness
in transforming the space. The goal is not to fool the viewer into thinking the represented object
is actually present, but to create a representation that, in the appropriate context and subject to
relevant conventions, functions in various respects as if the object depicted were present.8 As we
shall see, painting functioning as a real metaphor expands the ways painted scenery and painting
in general can fulfill some of the functions of set design.
2 Some Functions of Sets
Set design has many functions; I shall discuss four of them. A set establishes the place of the action;
creates a mood or atmosphere; defines the acting space, both by identifying a space as a place for
a performance and by delineating its boundaries; and organizes or structures the acting space.9
A set may establish the place of the action by showing what such a place would look like,
whether generic or specific, real or fictional. A backdrop depicting a deep dark forest conveys that
the action takes place in a deep dark forest. But a backdrop is not like an illustration in a book. It
doesn’t just show you something so you conclude, “ that’s what the place of the action is ( or looks
like).” It doesn’t function merely as an object of visual attention, but it transforms the space of the
stage into the fictional place of the action ( and it can create imaginary space off stage). The image
substitutes for an actual forest, the place or scene it represents, making actions performed by the
actors, insofar as they are portraying certain characters, appropriate. Images of gods, saints, or
other religious figures are often used as real metaphors, and serve as the recipients of reverence,
gifts, and obeisance that would be due the actual god or saint. The image transforms the stage into
a place where characters representing the actions of bowing, praying, or offering gifts in relation
to the image is made appropriate. And although a backdrop may appear to accomplish this just by
being seen, its positioning is relevant. The conventions of theater require that actors be in front of
and within a certain distance of the backdrop.
Another function of a set is to establish a given mood or atmosphere. It can do this both
iconically— in virtue of the content of the image, as a picture of a graveyard might evoke a certain
kind of m ood— a nd a niconically— i n virtue of other visual qualities, such as color, form,
and expressive qualities.10 Establishing the fictional place of the action and providing a mood or
atmosphere are two of the most important roles for painted scenery.
A set also may help to define the three- dimensional acting space. Defining the acting space
includes both ( 1) identifying an area as a stage or acting space and ( 2) circumscribing or delineating
the perimeter of the area within which a performance takes place.11 I begin with the first. Often
nothing special is needed to identify the acting space: theater architecture— t he stage and the orientation
of the seating— do that for the audience. Nevertheless, as I have indicated, painted scenery
may provide an image of the place of the action, where the conventions of theater enable it to
Painting and Theater
241
transform a space into a place for actors, thus identifying the space as a stage. But it is not necessary
for a painting to effect this transformation by representing the place of the a ction— it may do so,
for example, by representing some other place. At the rear of the Noh stage there is traditionally
a painting of a pine tree. The pine tree represents the abode of the gods, and the performance is
carried out for the gods. The image substitutes for what it represents, transforming the space into
a place for a Noh play to be performed for the g ods— b ut it does not represent the place of the
action, which may be elsewhere, such as in someone’s home or on a battlefield.
The acting area may extend beyond the proscenium arch or into the aisles and the seats. Again,
scenery is hardly necessary to signal the enlargement: audiences are likely to read wherever actors
go as “ a stage” ( even though it does not follow that every actor visible to the audience will necessarily
be “ on stage”). Nevertheless, painted flats and other scenery beyond the stage can encourage the
audience to anticipate that these areas will be used as performance spaces and to speculate ( under
the influence of the painted imagery) about what might happen there. This use of scenery beyond
the stage is nicely accommodated by Susanne Langer’s view that the “ forward- looking flow”
of the action that takes place over time is the essence of the dramatic.12 Anticipating future action
can enhance the meaningfulness of current events because of their perceived relations to future and
past events. Even the initial liminality of such places can heighten the sense of flow of the narrative.
The other aspect of defining the acting space is circumscribing or delineating its perimeter.
Even if painting is t wo- dimensional it can do this, since t wo- dimensional images may be positioned
in such a way as to establish boundaries of the acting space. The positioning of images ( of
alleyways or corridors) on flats or wings, not just the material support, establishes the exits; the
positioning of an image ( of a wall or chasm), just as much as the fabric on which the image appears,
defines the rear limits of the stage or acting area.
Painting extends three- d imensionally into space when on a curved or angled surface. The
physical positioning of the painting and its extension in space may combine with the character
of the image to establish both the place of the action and the perimeter of the acting space. For
example, a scene may take place within the boundaries of a curved stone wall, represented by a
painting of a wall. The painted image serves to identify the place where the action occurs, and
its positioning identifies the boundaries of the acting space. The image of a wall serves as a real
metaphor: it substitutes for the presence of an actual wall. Indeed, our understanding of the ways
in which painted scenery serves these three functions of set design— identifying the place of the
action, establishing a mood or atmosphere, and defining the stage by identifying it as an acting
place and circumscribing its p erimeter— are enhanced by understanding how painting can serve
as a real metaphor. The situation is a little more complicated for a fourth function of set design:
organizing or structuring the acting space.
3 A Fourth Function of Sets: Structuring the Acting Space
A fourth function of sets is not handled well by painted scenery: organizing or structuring the
acting space. A set structures the acting space when it makes it logical or reasonable for actors,
representing their characters, to stand in a particular place, to move around in a particular way, and
enter and exit where they do. Meaningless motion and random activity on stage tend to confuse
and distract the audience; actor movements should make what is happening more, or at least not
less, comprehensible. To transform a space into a stage or a place for acting does not necessarily organize
or structure that space for the actors. And to define an acting s pace— i dentify it as an acting
space and mark its perimeter— does not itself organize movement and positioning within the space.
Painted scenery, even when strategically positioned within or occupying space, has two major
limitations when it comes to structuring the acting space: it is not as versatile as actual objects, and
it is handicapped by the human visual perception system.
Susan L. Feagin
242
First, the most fruitful way to structure the real space of the stage is to use actual three
dimensional objects rather than representations of them as part of a painted scene. Objects’ loca
tions affect how we m ove— toward, away from, or around them, whether we touch them, pic
them up and use them, resist touching them, or try but fail to pick them up or use them. Tw
actors can use a desk to represent their characters facing off against each other on either side of it,
reaching out across it, walking around to meet in front of or behind it, getting on top of it, hidin
beneath it, treating it as an obstacle, or using it to perform acrobatics. None of this is possible wit
a painted table on a backdrop. It is possible to exploit the whimsy of interacting with pictures o
objects as if they were real objects, though the humor often stems from the way the image stymie
movement in comparison with what one could do with an actual object. You can’t walk up a pic
ture of stairs; you can’t grab an object from a picture of an object on a table. Painting just does not
have the potential to organize acting space and control actor movement the way real objects do.
This is not to say painted scenes have no potential of this sort at all. There may be ways characters
can interact with an object or situation depicted in a scene: they can point to it, look at it, or
refer to it. I also above described how a painted image of a religious figure, even if part of a broader
scene, could be the object of particular acts of reverence or prayer. There may be another type of
possibility. Suppose that the left half of a backdrop depicts a scene inside a house and the right side
a scene outside. The painted scenes may structure actor movement so that an actor moves from left
to right to go outdoors and vice- v ersa to go indoors. Alternatively, however, one might say that
the structuring of the space and related movement is due to the painted imagery establishing two
contiguous places of action. As mentioned above, establishing the place of the action is something
painted scenery does well.13
The second limitation, the way humans visually perceive distance and perspective, applies mos
clearly to the use of geometric perspective in painted scenery, such as in 1500– 1900 Europe. On
of the strengths of geometrical perspective is its capacity to represent in a precise way relativ
spatial locations among objects within a painted scene. Another is its potential for creating an im
pression of space extending behind the backdrop and, thanks to angled perspective, for extendin
the impression of space off to the side of the acting space.14 In addition, painted doorways an
windows can imply other rooms or outdoor spaces.15
But, none of this serves to structure the acting space on the stage itself. Even though perspective
painting can create an imaginary space behind and beside the flat image, it does not extend the
perspective illusion forward to measure or organize the real space in front of the painted surface.
An image can substitute for the real space it pictorially represents. That is, it can serve as a real
metaphor for the represented scene and transform the space of the stage into the represented place.
But the picture does not represent the space in front of the picture, so the measurement of the
space in the picture does not thereby apply to the real space in front of it.
Various features of the human perceptual system actually prevent us from seeing the depicted
space in a t wo- d imensional image as continuous with the real space in front of it. O ne- p oint perspective,
for example, distorts audience perception of the size of actors, making downstage actors
appear smaller and upstage actors larger in relation to the painted scene.16 But one-point perspective
is not the only problem. Any relatively flat, two- dimensional rendering of an object or scene
in depth, where some objects are supposed to be in front of or behind others, can create a problem.
The perception of the relative motion of actors on stage in relation to such a scene involves parallax.
Our angle of vision changes on the moving entity but not in sync with the depicted items in
the backdrop, indicating a discontinuity between real and depicted spaces. Parallax is an important
way of detecting distance, and it prevents us from perceiving moving actors as being in a unified
space with painted objects in space on a backdrop.
-
-
k
o
g
h
f
s
-
t
e
e
-
g
d
The
proscenium arch, adapted from the picture frame, highlights rather than resolves the
spatial disunity. A picture frame creates a break between the fictional space of a relatively
Painting and Theater
243
Susan
L. Feagin
244
since they blocked sight lines. Site- s pecific productions take advantage of real rather than depicted
places and spaces, “ borrowing” scenery rather than pictorially representing it. The 2 0thcentury
French dramatist, essayist, and director Antonin Artaud, known for his “ Theater of
Cruelty,” defended the “ total work of art” as a site where all the senses— including physical, bodily
experiences— a re to be combined to produce a unified experience, further marginalizing painted
scenery as weak, illusionistic, and unduly committed to the primacy of visual communication. As
is well known, the word “ theater” is derived from the Greek for a place for viewing. The place
for viewing became transmuted into a place for experiencing and feeling with the whole body.
4 Beyond Backdrops
Painted backdrops are well suited to setting the scene, creating an atmosphere, and identifying
and defining the boundaries of an acting space. Though they may help to organize the acting
space— such as when an image of a god or other religious figure serves as a focal point and hence
organizer of actor movement— there are other possibilities where paintings representing single
entities, rather than entire scenes, have an organizing potential that is more like that of props.25
A picture representing a single entity is less subject to the two limitations of painted scenery
described above. It can have more potential for organizing actor movement since, as a discrete
entity, it can be positioned in and move around the stage space, and be the target of an action. A
real cup provides more opportunities for some types of actor movement than a representation of a
cup, but a bit of imagination reveals potential for the substitute that goes beyond the possibilities
inherent in the original. For example, at one point in their theater piece Wear and Tear, members
of the A ustin- b ased company The Back Pack wear small pads of paper strapped on their arms.
Every page of the pads contains a drawing of a leaf.26 The performers are trees and their arms
are branches, to which ( pictures of ) leaves are attached. The branches move wildly and the wind
blows; the performers tear off pages of the sketchpads and the leaves fall. Someone arrives attempting
with little success to “ rake” the leaves with a broom ( labeled as a rake by a picture of a r ake—
another function of the image), followed by someone with an instantly effective, s uper- p owerful
leaf blower. Ironically, the leaf blower is more effective at removing the drawings that represent
leaves than the object whose actual function is to remove pieces of paper. The performance plays
on the audience’s awareness that they are looking at pictures, pictures that are functioning substitutes
for what they represent.27
With regard to the second limitation, the way humans perceive depth, the contrast between
images as substitutes and painted scenery is stark. There is no two- d imensional representation
of moderate to deep space in the image of a leaf or other single entity, and hence no attempt to
organize the stage space in virtue of it. Actor movement is instead rationalized and controlled by
treating the images as substitutes for what they represent. The drawings function more like props,
actual space- occupying objects. The drawings do not set the mood or scene but their manipulation
drives the action. I do not claim that, in the role of real metaphor, painting is the future of
theater, but instead that it has been both an u nder- r ecognized presence and is a viable future option,
where its potential is secured by the power of its location and occupation of space— potential
long obscured by the historical dominance of painted scenery.28
For 400 years in Europe, painters recognized as some of the finest artists of their day were involved
in creating painted scenery for theatrical performance, scenery that was heavily influenced
by the use of illusionistic methods for representing space. But the control of artist- p ainters over set
design did not help distinguish theatrical performances as works of art. Instead, two- d imensional
illusion worked against the inherent t hree- dimensionality and actual presence of human performers.
As theatrical performance developed as an independent art form in its own right, unified in
the presentation of its components, painting lost its grip on set design in the West. I doubt that
Painting and Theater
245
painting in any form could ever maintain or reprise the dominance over theatrical set design that
it held for 400 years. Yet, it is important to recognize the role as real metaphors that images have
and continue to play in theatrical performance, a role that does not create a dissonance between
the real, three- dimensional stage space and a two- dimensional representation of space, and that
helps to perform some of the traditional functions of sets.
Notes
1 John Barnes, “ Painting of Scenes,” in the Oxford Encyclopedia of Theatre and Performance, vol. II, ed. Dennis
Kennedy ( Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), p. 990; also Matthew Wilson Smith, “ Scenography,”
in Kennedy, vol. II, p. 1201.
2 Oscar G. Brockett, with Franklin J. Hildy, History of the Theatre, 8th ed. ( Boston: Allyn and Bacon,
1999), p p. 129, 134.
3 Pierre Lavedan, Historire D’urbanisme, vol. 1 ( Paris, 1959), p. 27; quoted in Marvin Carlson, Places of
Performance: The Semiotics of Theatre Architecture ( Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989), p. 23.
4 For a more extended discussion of this idea see Susan Feagin, “ Painting,” in The Oxford Handbook of
Aesthetics, ed. Jerrold Levinson ( Oxford University Press, 2003), p p. 5 16– 535.
5 Jakob Stejskal drives home the point in his careful and sensitive study, “ Substitution by Image: The Very
Idea,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 77.1 (Winter 2019): 55–66, esp. pp. 55–56, 62.
6 I am not here including site specific works, which have an even more intimate relation to their surroundings.
They are arguably partly constituted by their relation to a specific site, so that if removed ( or
if the site is altered in relevant ways), the work is at least partly lost.
7 David Summers, “ Real Metaphor,” in Visual Theory: Painting and Interpretation, ed. Norman Bryson,
Michael Ann Holly and Keith Moxey ( New York: Harper Collins, 1991), p p. 231– 2 59. See also Susan L.
Feagin, “ Paintings and their Places,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 73 (1995): 260–268; repr. Art and
Its Messages, ed. Stephen Davies ( University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997), p p. 17– 25.
Stejskal, “ Substitution by Image,” tracks the development of related ideas in Ernst Gombrich, Jean-
Pierre Vernant, and Hans Beltung.
8 Many examples of real metaphor and related notions provided in the art historical literature are sculptural
( often painted sculpture) rather than ( relatively) t wo- d imensional pictures. This intriguing fact
clearly deserves more attention than it is possible to provide here.
9 Oscar G. Brockett and Robert J. Ball, The Essential Theatre, 8th ed. ( Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth,
2004), p p. 361– 3 84. In discussing only the functions of sets as auxiliary to the action, I do not
deny the possibility that scenographers can be c o- creators of theatrical productions.
10 The distinction is not always easy to draw. The extent to which an image is iconic may depend on the
extent to which the relevant affective qualities (s uch as brooding, restful, joyful, etc.) are features of the
depicted scene ( it is a brooding cemetery) and to what extent they are effects of the colors and forms of
the painting.
11 I am assuming that these are done ultimately for the benefit of the audience. What an actor uses to know
where to go or not to go may be different from what defines the space for the audience.
12 Susanne K. Langer, Feeling and Form: A Theory of Art (N ew York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1953),
pp. 307, 311.
13 I find the alternative explanation more plausible, since it seems necessary to have some on stage indicator
that each of the backdrop scenes is to be extended forward in this way. However, the point is debatable.
14 Ferdinando Galli Bibiena, from a family of architects and scenic designers, introduced angled perspective
in the 18th century. The technique employed one or more vanishing points to the side of the image
so it recedes off the edge of the panel and invites viewers to complete the scene in their imagination. See
Smith, “Scenography,” p. 1204.
15 See Carlson, Places of Performance, p . 131. Tim Fitzpatrick refers to these as “ localized off” space, those
that are adjacent to the onstage space, as opposed to “ unlocalized off” space, which is not imagined as
contiguous to the stage space and more remote. See Fitzpatrick, “ The Dialectics of S pace- Time: Dramaturgical
and Directorial Strategies for Performance and Fictional World,” in Performance: From Product to
Process, ed. Tim Fitzpatrick ( Sydney: Frederick May Foundation, 1989), p p. 6 0– 62.
16 See, for example, Freddie Rokem, “ Scenographic Paradigms: Some Principles of Perception and Interpretation,”
Performance Research 18.3 ( Summer 2013): 7 5– 83, at 76. W ell- known optical illusions vividly
demonstrate the problem. See, for example, https://therealweeklyshow.wordpress.com/2014/01/15/5-moremind-
bending-optical-illusions/walking-men-size-illusion/ accessed 10/20/19.
Susan
L. Feagin
246
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-31 247
25PAINTERLY ASPIRATIONS IN POETRYJohn Gibson
1 Introduction
Poetry is, no doubt, a literary art, yet it has always encroached upon the territory of the other arts. Poetry aspires to the status of music, exploiting meter and the prosodic features of language to create verses with rhythmic, sonic, and melodic structures. It is for something like this reason that Friedrich Nietzsche declares poetry to depend “ utterly on the spirit of music, music itself” ( Nietzsche, 1999; 36), and Edgar Allen Poe defines it as the “ rhythmical creation of beauty” ( Poe, 2006; 576. See also Ribeiro, 2007). And poems are, of course, often animated by intense painterly ambitions, using poetic language to conjure up a kind of picture, and not merely a description, of its subject matter. Writing on poetry from antiquity through the Renaissance never tires of assert-ing this. Simonides of Ceos casts poetry as “ painting that speaks” ( Plutarch, 1992; 157), Horace famously insists that ut pictura poesis ( Horace, 1989; 70), and Leonardo da Vince pronounces poetry to be “ painting that is felt rather than seen” ( da Vinci, 2008; 201).
It is the apparent affinity between poetry and painting that will occupy me here. While in modernity scholars are on the whole much less willing to invoke the poetry- a s- p ainting model literally or uncritically, a key feature of it is still with us. A hint as to what this key feature is taken to be comes in the name of one of modernism’s iconic poetic movements: Imagism. As Robert von Hallberg puts it, images “ are constitutive, not ornamental, of thought, in modernist poetic doctrine” ( Hallberg, 2008; 112). The kernel of presumed truth in the old model is that poetry and painting are aligned in respect to the essential role images play in each. Stronger still, the idea that remains is that the imagistic dimension of poetry is essential to how poems “ think” and so communicate, and that matters are much the same in regard to how paintings “ think” and produce meaning.
Yet just what are we asserting when we claim that poems yield images and make of them objects of aesthetic regard and critical scrutiny? Images in what sense, exactly? The point of this chapter is to outline a way of thinking about these questions and a strategy for answering them. We will see that we need a theory of the image that is fit for poetry and thus that contrasts in significant ways with the kinds of image that paintings produce. This should hardly come as a surprise. But in conclusion, I will suggest that what we stand to learn about how poems harness images for expressing thought and generating meaning promises to tell us something interesting about how paintings do, too. In the end, philosophers of poetry and painting alike need an ac-count of how images become freighted with thought, feeling, and aboutness. This is because it is
John Gibson
248
by offering an image of a particular sort that poets and painters establish that all- i mportant link
between art and life, and this, we will see, is one of the chief ways each is able to endow their
works with basic forms of critical, epistemic, and culture significance.
2 Verbal Images
Note immediately that we can find entirely literal respects in which poems produce images in
such a manner that they effectively function as paintings in words. Guillaume Apollinaire’s 1918
“ Il Pleut” is one such example1:
Here we have a poem that is itself a visual image. But while it is an image made of words, none
of the aesthetic, semantic, symbolic, and prosodic dimensions of the poem’s language are implicated
in the creation of this image, though surely they contribute to the overall effect of the poem.
The mere arrangement of words in whitespace suffices to craft this image, and all that is needed
in order to understand how Apollinaire pulled this off is whatever the theory of depiction offers
us for making sense of how any visual representation does.
This helps us to see what our question amounts to. In asking what a poetic image is, we are
at least trying to understand a kind of verbal image, not a visual one, any rate not a literally visual
one.2 Whatever else a poetic image might be, we expect it to be constituted not just of words but
through what these words say and the particular manner they say it. We thus need to understand
the kinds of images that are in some manner present in a poem’s language and manufactured by
properly poetic machinery. We do not yet know what this machinery is, but it should be clear that
we will not correct this ignorance by finding poems that one can frame and hang on a wall.
Painterly Aspirations in Poetry
249
Better, but just slightly so, would be to look to ekphrastic poems for a model. In its most literal
application, ekphrasis names a classical rhetorical exercise in which students were asked to write a
poem that “ calls out” or “ proclaims” a work from a different artistic medium, say by composing
a lyric that strives to capture the essence of particular statue. More broadly, it can designate any
attempt to offer a poetic representation of an object of non- n egligible aesthetic and artistic value,
for instance, Homer’s description of Achilles’s shield in the Iliad. In modern poetics, we have an
ekphrastic poem whenever we attempt, if you will, to put a painting to poetry, and the connection
between a poem and an indicated painting becomes paramount. Contemporary examples
would be Anne Sexton’s “ The Starry Night” ( 1981) or Wislawa Szymborska’s “ Two Monkeys by
Brueghel” ( 1993), though the list is long indeed.
It is true that in ekphrastic poems we often find properly poetic verbal images, but the idea of
ekphrasis, taken in its standard usage in poetics, is still too narrow to capture what we are after.
The label demands nothing especially imagistic from the poem that wishes to be ekphrastic; it just
requires that a poem be about an image found outside the poem. The practice, especially in its
modern sense, also makes the connection between poems and particular paintings too intimate,
for the obvious reason that we have poems which produce images, perhaps even painterly ones,
but that do not strive to represent a given painting at all.
What is needed is an account of verbal imagery and the conditions under which it becomes
recognizably poetic, not an account of how poems can successfully function as paintings or come
to be about them. And to put matters this way is to make it clear that we are in the realm of
another, much broader and more pervasive, dimension of language, a power perhaps most perfectly
exercised in poetry but certainly found elsewhere. In his discussion of verbal icons, W. J.
T. Mitchell puts the issues in these terms: “F igurative language [...] is what we ordinarily mean
when we talk about verbal imagery. The phrase, ‘ verbal imagery,’ in other words, seems to be a
metaphor for metaphor itself!” ( Mitchell 2013; 21). In short, what we need to explore is how the
imagistic dimension of poetry relies on the figurative manipulation of words and exploits their
metaphoric potential.
Caution is required here. We haven’t said anything informative or interesting if we simply describe
this power of poetry to produce verbal images as “ metaphoric.” “ Metaphor” gestures in the
general direction of many disparate n on- literal uses of language, and a good number of those uses
will have little to do with the production of poetic verbal imagery. For example, dead metaphors
likely demand nothing of the imagination and so, as we will see, do not require the kind of seeingas
that calls on words to produce an image over and above a determinate semantic content. And
there may be metaphors that are very much alive that nonetheless do not require us to consider
anything picture- like in order to grasp their import ( for these and related issues, see Camp, 2006;
Stern, 2000; Wearing, 2006). The immensely tired but still living “ Juliet is the Sun” might be one
such example. Whatever “ sun” means in this context, it has not yet settled into a conventional
sense, as, say, “ embattled” has when used to describe a certain philosopher’s status in the profession.
It also isn’t clear that readers need to picture Juliet this way or that to get Romeo’s point, given
the sheer familiarity of both the metaphor and the drama, as well as its appearance in virtually
every philosophical discussion of metaphor since the 1940s. The kinds of metaphor that matter
to my argument cannot count on established usage to lead the mind to meaning, and this is to be
expected, since we are trying to understand the intensely creative language of poetry, which often
takes great pride in producing meanings that are in utter excess of established linguistic usage.
One more word of caution. In work on figurative language, one finds frequent reference to
the class of metaphors, similes, and analogies that are “ poetic” and so are to be contrasted with
the “ low- energy” or prosaic metaphors of the unambitious everyday sort ( Davies, 1982; 80). In
these debates, the designation “ poetic” describes a metaphor as something like elaborate, aesthetically
charged, and admirably creative ( see Reimer and Camp, 2008). Asking you to think of someone as “ a
John
Gibson
250
bulldozer” is not poetic in this sense. But when T.S. Eliot writes of an “ evening spread out against the sky/ Like a patient etherized upon a table,” we have a figurative deployment of language that aspires to the status of “ poeticity,” as it once would have been put (“ The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock,” 1910). Yet Eliot’s lines achieve this status in part because of the extraordinary way they picture their object, creating an anxious image of evening as still much as one is when put under just before an invasive surgery. We won’t learn much about this imagistic power of poetry if we just consider the mellifluousness and tensed juxtapositions of really, really good metaphors. What in part gives the poetry to a poetic image is that it enables an aesthetically heightened form of attention to an object— a n imaginative corollary to perceptual attention— w rought with words but that cre-ates something in excess of what words do in their mundane conversational contexts. It is this ver-bally created “ object” and its poetic power that we need to explore, quite in addition to the merely aesthetic features of the language through which it is created. It is this creative power of metaphor that helps us to see something important about poetry and its presumably painterly dimension.
3 Imagistic Meaning
We need to understand a particular power of metaphor that brings to clarity a particular power of poetry, namely, that in certain contexts poetry conveys thought and produces meaning by virtue of verbal imagery. In this section, I will attempt to make the idea seem intuitive, using two case studies that highlight different aspects of these powers. Both cases are admittedly fanciful but, I hope, instructive nonetheless.
In each case, assume, I approach a conversation with you with the goal of getting you to see some state of affairs more or less as I do, and I take you to begin the exchange with no firm grasp of the matter at all. That is, you are unfamiliar with the subject of discussion and I need to find a way to provide you with an object of understanding. My labor, assume, is one of devising an effective manner of forming an image— n ote how natural the term feels here— o f what I wish you to see as I do.
Case 1
You are a guest at my university. My colleague Wes, I tell you, is a particular kind of jerk and you really must avoid him at the dinner tonight. You ask me, “ what kind jerk, exactly?” and I begin to fumble around for words, producing, in the process, a mess of true descriptions. I tell you that despite being widely despised, he has a certain “ je ne sais quoi” and is often the center of attention; that he regularly insinuates salacious things about faculty who challenge him; that he speaks in a soft, smoky voice, which gives a false impression of depth and intimacy; that he draws people to him only to reveal who he really is once trust has been established; that he has a motorcycle; that he takes great delight in the spontaneous creation of chaos, always finding ingenious ways to set colleagues against one another on the spot. I could keep going, but I sense that I’ve told you a lot without saying much at all, and at any rate I haven’t made my point. So in an attempt to bring it all home, I say, “ imagine a kind of Miles Davis of malice. That’s Wes!” Finding that a tad purple, I try again: “ Wes is the Iago of the Philosophy Department.” “ Regardless,” I say, “ I’m trying to tell you that when it comes to bad behavior, he’s an extraordinary improviser.”
Assume that both of my metaphors are apt, given who Wes is and who Miles Davis and Iago were. It is arguable that my two metaphors state no truths, provide no facts- of- the- matter, in addition to those given in the initial true descriptions. But they are hardly gratuitous linguistic embellishments. Each metaphor provides a radically different way of organizing those disjointed truths: the metaphors make them cohere in determinate ways. They open up new ways of seeing Wes, since each metaphor calls on us not just to describe him one way or another but enlists the
Painterly Aspirations in Poetry
251
imagination in an act of s eeing- a s ( see Wollheim, 1980; 1 47– 1 50), namely, e.g., as Miles Davis, at
least in respect to the performance of evil. The effect of this is that of orientating you in thought
and feeling to Wes in a specific, and specifically imaginative, manner. Through this, a nuanced
purchase on him, and not merely a set of properties he truly possesses, is articulated and shared. The
metaphors make the descriptions hang together in a particular manner, and, in so doing, offer an
image of how I take Wes to hang together as a person.
In a fantastically apt phrase, Troy Jollimore calls the kind of orientation a metaphor achieves a
“ cognitive grasp,” with the notion of a grasp “ conceived holistically rather than as a set of discrete,
atomistic propositions,” and this is a fine way of describing how my metaphors of Wes stand in
relation to the true descriptions they structure and bring to a point ( Jollimore, 2009; 142). Elizabeth
Camp describes this as metaphor’s power to prompt an imaginative perspective on a subject, by
“ imposing a complex structure of relative prominence on them, so that some features stick out in
our minds while others fade into the background, and by making some features especially central
to explaining others,” which explains how the metaphors of Wes yield distinctive purchases on
Wes ( Camp, 2009). Regardless of whether we opt to call the organizational work these metaphors
do “ orientations,” “ cognitive grasps,” “ perspectives,” or “ purchases,” one thing is very clear: they
each offer a different way of making sense of Wes. They each provide a different way of thinking about
him, of making him meaning ful to you, and of presenting him as a precise object of understanding. And
this gives us an intuitive and earthbound sense of what it means to say that an image “ thinks” and
“ communicates” by virtue of its status as an image.
If the language in my example is shorn of i magery— if I say “ Wes devises evil schemes with
stunning quickness” and leave out the Miles Davisness or Iagoness of how he does so— I provide
facts about a person but not a picture of the person to whom these facts apply. In this case, there
is a hole at the very the center of your conception of the subject of our discussion. We might even
think that these two images, Wes-as-Miles-Davis or Wes-as-Iago, would be much more accurately
captured with a literal picture than a literal statement, in part because the metaphors ascribe
a certain look and feel to him, and an artistic gesture rather than a description is better suited for
capturing such things. It is also because of the picture- like quality of the verbal image that we can
explain the intrusion of the aesthetic in the metaphor: of language intended to color and stylize
thought. It works upon the sound of words, plays upon suggestion, commonplaces, and sets of
associations ( of Miles Davis, Iago, jazz culture, Othello, false friends, etc.) and places the object,
Wes, at a particular point in the space of value, though good luck stating exactly and literally what
that point is. Verbal images do to speak at that level of specificity ( see Kulvicki, 2014; 1 55– 172).
This is one point at which the analogy with visual pictures ends, since verbal images lack entirely
the kind of perceptual detail of a visual image. This is why it would not only be silly but a category
error to ask whether W es- as- Iago should be imagined as dressed in contemporary urban or
Venetian clothing circa 1603.
One final point. It is often thought that metaphors are a disruption of literal language. Perhaps,
but as the above makes clear, metaphors often coopt the literal language that went before
it— language that is not itself contained in the grammatic relationship a metaphor establishes between
subject and predicate— and gives it a role to play in its imaginative enterprise. Some of the
predicates in my clumsy descriptions of Wes rely on dead, or at least sleeping, metaphors, and the
others are straightforwardly literal. But the metaphors awaken an imagistic force in them. The invocation
of Miles Davis enlivens prior uses of “ smoky,” “ improviser,” “ soft,” and perhaps even “ je
ne sais quoi,” given Davis’s genius at creating musical atmospheres that defy affective description.
When I enlist the image of Iago, “ spontaneous” is given a different force, since Iago, in his way,
was an also immensely successful improviser of malice; and it gives an imaginative charge to terms
like “ set against,” “ insinuate,” and “ false impression,” certainly to those who know his story. In
fact, even certain of the straightforwardly literal descriptions are given an essentially imagistic function. On
John
Gibson
252
any charitable interpretation of my true descriptions, “ has a motorcycle” functions not to convey a proposition about Wes so much as to picture him and his obnoxiousness in a particular way. If one does not assume this, the inclusion of “ has a motorcycle” in the exchange is gratuitous, since the information it conveys would be entirely beside the point. In this respect, the whole of my com-municative act is reshaped by the metaphor, precisely because it is all is implicated in the creation of a verbal image of Wes and so endows the entire exchange with a recognizably imagistic dimension.
Poetry makes great use of this power to endow language, metaphoric or otherwise, with an imagistic function. A painting, because visual, can furnish its images with extraordinary de-terminacy internally. It can simply depict what it wishes us to see. Metaphors and poetic verbal images, owing to the condensation of thought typical of each, usually cannot, so this coopting of surrounding swaths of literal language as a way of achieving determinacy becomes paramount ( see John, 2013; Lamarque, 2009 & 2015). William Wordsworth was a great practitioner of this. Consider his sonnet “ The World is Too Much with Us” ( 1802) and note how he passes seamlessly from philosophical registers to figurative ones that embody, in straightforwardly verbal images, the sense of his various claims about the poverty of experience in modernity:
The world is too much with us; late and soon,Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers;— Little we see in Nature that is ours;We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon;The winds that will be howling at all hours,And are u p- gathered now like sleeping flowers;For this, for everything, we are out of tune;It moves us not. Great God! I’d rather beA Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn.3
It is crucial to see that the entire poem functions as a verbal image, since its images of the sea flirting with the moon, the sleeping flowers, pagans, and Proteus subsume and make cohere the philosophical declarations about alienation, belatedness, and the atrophy of our distinctly human “ powers.” What we might call the “ total verbal image” of the poem refers not to the manner in which various lines of a poem metaphorically picture their grammatical subjects (“ getting and spending” as a “ sordid boon,” etc.) but to how the whole of poem itself pictures its subject: our world and our place in it. Thus as with my mundane examples of Wes, the various images in Wordsworth’s poem charge the entire poem with an imagistic function, and indeed the poem itself becomes an image of us, at any rate of the various ways of being “ us” that it wishes to con-demn. The poem in a sense thereby achieves the determinacy of a painting through its coopting of all of its language, literal included, in its elaboration of an image, verbal at its core, of an enchanted world that is now lost to us. Again, this is not a kind of perceptual determinacy, and it is to commit a category error to expect this. It is a kind of determinacy of content and aboutness: of the degree of thought and feeling that an image is able to convey about its subject.
Case 2
After some 25 years since university, you’ve found me on the internet. You send a few emails that reestablish a sense of connection, and then you begin to test boundaries. After successfully probing me for information about my job and the like, you ask me about my romantic life. Since we’re on
Painterly Aspirations in Poetry
253
email, I opt to enlist an image to convey my response, but I am undecided as to exactly what I
want to reveal. I first write, “ At the moment it is a bit like this,” and insert the following image:
I then think twice and decide that I’d rather render the truth more optimistically. I replace the
initial image with:
And then I decide that I want to change the sense of my response entirely so as to ensure no
further intrusion:
John Gibson
254
In these examples, an actual image functions as a grammatical object: a proper picture is used as a predicate that completes the thought of a sentence and is therefore responsible for enriching it with meaning.4 But the images do so in a distinctive manner, not quite by telling you what but how to think about my romantic life. The first image asks you to view it as a catastrophe; the second as put on hold while I happily attend to other matters; and the third, very unlike the others, tells you how to think not about my life but your prying. Dull and wildly broad “ truths” are conveyed, too: that I’m single, and that it is tragic, or fabulous, or none of your business. But it is how these images open up and structure ways of thinking about my life that is of primary importance here, and this, rather than any discrete truths these perspectives make available to you, is where the basic cognitive and communicative action takes places.
It would be a mistake to say that the second and third images communicate more about their subject ( my life) simply because they provide more language. It is true that they have more words than the first sign, but the words play no more of a role in detailing thought here than the straight-forwardly aesthetic— o ne could just as easily say formal— f eatures of the images. The chains in the first image, the cheery garishness of the second, and the stern font of the third, all bear as much of the burden of m eaning- production as the “ for the season” of second and the vulgarity of the third do. The point is, in each of these cases, the a esthetic- visual elements are charged with giving an otherwise null conception of my romantic life a determinate shape and color, and they are charged with just as much, indeed likely much more, of the communicative labor than the linguistic el-ements are. They produce “ thought” through the ways in which they color and shape a sense of the subject. In fact, we could remove all the language except for “ closed” and virtually the same perspectives on my romantic life would be achieved.
The philosopher of language who wishes to make absolutely everything hang on the provision of propositional forms of understanding might rejoin that these images will ultimately be propo-sitionally structured when made into a proper object of thought and understanding. We can grant this and even that understanding and meaning in these cases are not constitutionally opposed to propositional modes of articulation. The relevant question for our argument is whether it is a proposition or something else that coveys the insight and acts as the primary object of cognitive attention here. The answer is clearly that in these cases it is an image and its aesthetic and formal features that have this function. In their natural state, they are formally organized pictures, not propositionally structured statements. Meaning of this sort is a matter of import: of significance and not signification ( see Gibson, 2011; 2016). It is what we hit upon when we elaborate, again, how an image organizes thought and leads it to fairly precise destinations such that we can say what the image is “ about,” that is, what the point of an image like that, presented in this context, might reasonably be taken to be.
It is not a stretch to say that the role “ Miles Davis” or “ Iago” played in my verbal images in Case 1 have essentially the same function as these literal pictures in Case 2: that of completing a thought about an indicated subject. The visual images of my romantic life fill in the blanks in a different way from the verbal images in respect to Wes’ life. But I am still drawing upon the set of commonplaces associated with a notoriously difficult jazz icon, insipid holiday signage, a decrepit space chained off from public, an infamous villain, and so on. And this leads to an important point: I could have just as well provided an actual painting or an actual poem to the play the role these images did, plugging in, say, Picasso’s Guernica ( 1937) or T.S. Eliot’s The Waste Land(1922)to articulate a purchase on my romantic life. One would have demanded a greater investment of time to get its point across, but that is neither here nor there for my argument.
Both of the cases explored in this section show that whether an image is verbal or visual should make precisely no difference as to whether it can “ think,” establish relationships of aboutness, and so produce meaning, even understanding. A verbal image is, in effect, an assemblage of words that
Painterly
Aspirations in Poetry
255
are organized such that an act of imaginative s eeing- a s is made possible and, with it, a form of
attention to a subject that amounts a manner of figuring— here ordinary language permits us to say
picturing— it. A poem or metaphor can be painterly in this sense, then: they can “ think” through
an image and establish relationships of aboutness accordingly, as a painting would, though it of
course uses verbal rather than visual means to achieve this effect. We can also see that verbal
images are creatures of language that often strive, perhaps impossibly, to get beyond language,
since they often seek to establish an essentially n on- s emantic and irreducibly imaginative form of
attention to those worldly things that language is about: Miles Davis, a pleasant lea, even a motorcycle
( See Guttenplan, 2008). Even Iago, Proteus, and the other fictions enlisted in the above
examples are effectively given real status, insofar as the words that make them present to the mind
render them as an actual frame through which we picture some real feature of human concern, for
instance, Wes, my personal life, or the presumed disaster of experience in modernity.
4 Conclusion
Here is the general point I think we can take from all of this. It isn’t quite that a poem or a painting
has a figurative content ( or meaning) that gets the world right or wrong, no more than my
metaphors and my odd images do. It is rather that they can structure and give form— essentially
the form of the artwork i tself— to how we think about some feature of the world such that a new
sense is ascribed to it. Much as I can come to see a friend as Iago, I can also see the world through
the lens, imagistic at root, of a poem or painting. And this is often precisely the point of a poem,
as the example of Wordsworth makes clear: it yields an image of that messy thing called “ life” in
addition to the fictions and figurations that populate its lines and stanzas.
To make this move is to admit that the relationship between a poetic image of the world and
the world itself is ultimately metaphorical. But this is no loss. As Arthur Danto says, in his typically
vague but endearing fashion, “ an artwork becomes a metaphor for life, and life is transfigured”
( Danto, 1981, 172; see also Camp 2016). This capacity of a poem or painting to become an image
of “ life” and thus to offer a metaphorical transformation, if not of the thing itself, then of our
cognitive grasp of it, is central to how poetry and painting intervene in our cognitive, ethical, and
affective relationship to the word. Ultimately, it is this ability of the whole of a poem itself to come
to function as an image of life that explains the point of commonality with painting. For unless
a mere faithful portrait or landscape, a painting too pictures the world beyond it in an essentially
figurative manner. Much of the critical potential of poetry and painting consists in this and thus so
does much of its ethical, cognitive, and social significance ( see Gibson, 2019). It is how they come
to be about the world beyond the work and make of it an object not just of attention but scrutiny.5
Notes
1 https://www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/2012/inventingabstraction/?work=17, accessed
November 20th, 2020.
2 Verbal images of course may be “ visualized” through an effort of the sensory imagination and the production
of mental imagery of a particular sort. Since my focus is on verbal images, in which the content
of the image is presumably contained in a public use of language, I ignore the debate on the nature of
mental imagery. I have no doubt that this debate has much to tell us about how we entertain verbal images
in poetry and metaphor, though the matter is beyond the scope of this chapter. For discussion, see
Arcangeli ( 2019), Gregory ( 2016), and Stokes ( 2019).
3 https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/45564/the-world-is-too-much-with-us, accessed November
20th, 2020.
4 For this idea and way of framing it, I am indebted to Guttenberg ( 2005 & 2008). These styles of example
are his. I discuss this in much greater detail in Gibson ( 2011).
John
Gibson
256
5 A version of this chapter was presented as part of the ParoleImmagini lecture series at the University of Turin. I thank Carola Barbero, Davide Dal Sasso, and members of the audience for comments and feed back. I also thank Andreas Elpidorou, Avery Kolers, Jonathan Gilmore, and Noël Carroll for comments on the version published here.
Bibliography
Arcangeli, Margherita. ( 2019). The Two Faces of Mental Imagery. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research advance online publication. doi.org/ 10.1111/ phpr.12589.
Camp, Elisabeth. ( 2009). Two Varieties of Literary Imagination: Metaphor, Fiction, and Thought Experi ments. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 33(1),107–130.
Camp, Elisabeth. ( 2006) Metaphor and That Certain ‘ Je Ne Sais Quoi’. Philosophical Studies 129,1–25.
Danto, Arthur C. ( 1981). The Transfiguration of the Commonplace: A Philosophy of Art. Cambridge, MA: Har vard University Press.
Davies, Martin. ( 1982). Idiom and Metaphor. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society ,67–85.
Gibson, John. ( 2007). Fiction and the Weave of Life. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gibson, John. ( 2016). A Puzzle of Poetic Expression. The Philosophers’ Magazine ,56–62.
Gibson, John. ( 2019). An Aesthetics of Insight. In Wolfgang Huemer & Ìngrid Vendrell Ferran ( Eds.), Beauty: New Essays in Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art(pp. 277–306). Munich: Philosophia.
Gregory, Dominick. ( 2016). Imagination and Mental Imagery. In Amy Kind ( Ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of Imagination(pp. 97–110). London: Routledge, Group.
Guttenplan, Samuel. ( 2005). Objects of Metaphor. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Guttenplan, Samuel. ( 2008). Metaphor Without Properties. The Baltic International Yearbook of Cognition, Logic and Communication ,1–23.
Horace, Flaccus, Quintus Horatius, & Mayer, Roland H. ( 1989). De Arte Poetica. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
John, Eileen. ( 2013). Poetry and Directions for Thought. Philosophy and Literature (2),451–471.
Jollimore, Troy. ( 2009). Like a Picture or a Bump on the Head”: Vision, Cognition, and the Language of Poetry. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 33(1),131–158.
Kulvicki, John V. ( 2014). Images. London: Routledge.
Lamarque, Peter. ( 2009). Poetry and Abstract Thought. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 33(1),37–52.
Lamarque, Peter. ( 2015). Semantic Finegrainedness and Poetic Value. In John Gibson ( Ed.), The Philosophy of Poetry. Oxford: Oxford University Press (pp. 18–36).
Mitchell, W.J. Thomas. ( 2013). Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. ( 1999). The Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Poe, Edgar Allan, & Kennedy, J. Gerald. ( 2006). The Portable Edgar Allan Poe. New York: Penguin Books.
Plutarch., Kidd, I.G. & Waterfield, R. ( 1992) Essays. London: Penguin Books.
Ribeiro, Anna Christina. ( 2007). Intending to Repeat: A Definition of Poetry. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism (2),189–201.
Reimer, Marga, & Camp, Elisabeth. ( 2008). Metaphor. In Ernie Lepore & Barry C. Smith ( Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Language(pp. 845–863). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simecek, Karen. ( 2015). Beyond Narrative: Poetry, Emotion and the Perspectival View. British Journal of Aesthetics (4),497–513.
Stern, Josef. ( 2000). Metaphor in Context. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Stokes, Dustin. ( 2019). Mental Imagery and Fiction. Canadian Journal of Philosophy (6),731–754.
Vinci, Leonardo da. ( 2008). Notebooks. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Von Hallberg, Robert. ( 2008). Lyric Powers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wearing, Catherine. ( 2006) Metaphor and What is Said. Mind & Language, 21, 310–332.
Wollheim, Richard. ( 1980). Art and Its Objects. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-32 257
26PAINTING AND COMICSHenry John Pratt
1 Introduction
Even if painting is not an immediate ancestor of comics, an early stage of the painting process might be. The word “ cartoon,” often used ( somewhat misleadingly, as I argue in Pratt 2011) as synonymous with “ comic,” even derives from the practice of painting. As Robert Harvey recounts ( 2009; 26– 2 7), the English word “ cartoon” derives from the Italian cartone—the preliminary full- scale sketches painters used to make, often on cardboard, before applying brush to canvas.
The purpose of this chapter is to explore the continuing relationship between painting and comics. I will begin by comparing several ontological properties of the two artforms. The next section will take up the possibility of paintings that are also comics, which will provide a chal-lenge to that ontology. After considering a possible resolution to that challenge, I move on to a discussion of whether fully painted comics are ( tautological though it might sound) also paintings.
2 Ontology
Rather than dealing with “ real” definitions ( i.e., using necessary and sufficient conditions) of the artforms of painting and comics— inquiries that others have attempted but well beyond what I can accomplish he re— l et us work through three distinctions that will shed light on the ontological features that paintings and comics do and do not have in common. The result will be what I shall call, for convenience, the “ standard ontology” of paintings and comics.
1 In Languages of Art, Nelson Goodman divides artforms into autographic and allographic, in an attempt to provide an understanding of what it is for a given work to count as genuine ( Goodman 1968; 113). For autographic artforms, of which painting is exemplary, even a perfectly exact molecule- b y- m olecule duplicate is not genuine— i t would be a mere copy or a forgery. No matter how good our technique and technology gets, we cannot ever make an-other genuine Mona Lisa. For an allographic artform like the novel, by way of contrast, exact copies of works are genuine instances, not forgeries. A w ord- f or- w ord duplicate of Moby Dick just is that novel.
Comics, like paintings, are autographic. As Aaron Meskin puts it, “ An exact duplicate of a comic does not count as authentic unless it was mechanically copied from the original plate or art or some other genuine copy” ( 2012; 41). To take a r eal- world example: when the editors of The Complete Peanuts 1953–1954 collected the relevant Charles Schultz comics, they found
Henry
John Pratt
258
that for one Sunday comic ( May 3, 1953), the top tier could not be located. Artist Seth ( as the
book acknowledges) redrew the two missing panels in order to maintain consistent formatting.
Even if those panels happen to be perceptually identical in all respects to the missing
panels, the comic printed in the book would not be an authentic copy of the original.
2 The distinction between autographic and allographic artforms does not track another distinction
that Goodman draws ( 1968; 1 13– 1 14), between one-stage and two-stage artforms. This is
about what it takes for an artwork to be made available for critical reception. Some artworks,
like paintings ( autographic) and novels ( allographic), only require one stage for completion:
simplifying a bit, the painter or writer decides that the work is done, and it is done, f ully— no
further execution is necessary, or even possible.
Other artworks, like a violin sonata ( allographic), are t wo- stage. Once the score is completed,
the work still requires more execution for audiences to experience it— it requires a
performance. Comics, though autographic, fall into the t wo- s tage camp. Again, Meskin
writes, “ A comic artist’s work ( qua comics artist) is typically done when he or she has produced
the original art even though that art is not the artistic end product” ( 2012; 39). In the
same way that the block an artist makes for a woodcut looks rather different than the print it
is used to generate, the original art for a comic often looks rather different than the printed
copy that readers see. In what used to be the standard process for creating comics, the image
the artist gives to the printer would typically include penciled lines in blue that would not
show up in print, as well as instructions about layout ( e.g., bleeding to margins) and coloring.
Not to mention that most comics artists work at a scale bigger than the printed copy that their
readers will receive.
3 Finally, painting is a singular artform: for a particular painting, there can be only one genuine
copy. This is not the same as being autographic, since there are autographic artforms that are
not singular, but, rather, multiple. Film, for example, is an autographic, multiple artform: there
are multiple genuine copies of Blade II ( 2002), generated mechanically from the requisite
template. Comics is another. There are multiple, genuine copies ( currently fewer than 100) of
Action Comics #1, and even comics that happen to have only one copy could be reproduced in
such a way as to result in other genuine copies.
3 Comic Paintings
Consider painting qua artform. For my purposes, roughly, this would be the category containing
the kinds of artworks made from paint applied to a relatively flat substrate, often in a frame,
familiar from but not exclusive to high art contexts like museums and galleries. The ontological
considerations raised in the foregoing will be interestingly problematized if there are works that fit
into both the category of painting and the category of comics— w hat I will call “ comic paintings.”
Among comics scholars, it is generally accepted that William Hogarth’s Rake’s Progress series,
depicting the ruination of a prosperous young man, is at the least a p roto- comic. The most popular
versions of this series were engravings put into print in 1735. The originals, however, are eight
paintings made from 1732 to 1734. Both versions have many features in common with comics,
namely, they constitute a narrative told by means of discrete pictures meant to be viewed sequentially.
The fact that the original version ( to which I will be referring exclusively from henceforth
unless otherwise noted) both uses paint as a medium and consists of works that are comfortably
encompassed by the artform of painting does not undermine these similarities.
However, one might argue that Rake’s Progress does not provide much of a challenge to the standard
ontology, since it is not actually a comic. Ahistoricist theories of comics ( see, e.g., McCloud
1993, Blackbeard and Crain 1995, Hayman and Pratt 2005) tend to define the artform in terms
of formal characteristics only. Scott McCloud, notoriously, counts not only Rake’s Progress, but
Painting
and Comics
259
also ancient Egyptian paintings, pre- Columbian narrative art, the Bayeaux Tapestry, and many
other works as comics that are not ordinarily thought to be such ( 1993; 1 0– 16). If McCloud is
right, the overlap between the categories of comics and painting is considerably greater than most
believe— a controversial result. Meskin has argued forcefully that ahistoricist definitions are misplaced,
on the grounds that comics, like everything else, could not possibly have existed much
before they actually did, which was roughly the end of the 19th century ( 2007; 374). This echoes
Arthur Danto: Andy Warhol’s Brillo Boxes ( 1964) could not have been art in 1914, Danto claims,
just as “ there could not have been, everything being equal, flight insurance in the Middle Ages,
or Etruscan typewriter erasers” ( 1964; 581).
Perhaps a more apt and provocative set of examples can be located in the work of Roy Lichtenstein.
While he was not the only artist to appropriate comics in his paintings ( or even the first),
Lichtenstein is probably the most famous for doing so. Take Blam ( 1962), modeled after a single
panel of the comic All-American Men of War #89 ( 1962), which was drawn by Russ Heath. Blam
uses a visual vocabulary recognizable as originating in comics, as well as a characteristically onomatopoetic
sound effect, and unlike Rake’s Progress clearly was created at a time when comics were
commonplace. On my view, nonetheless, it is not a comic, for several reasons. The problem is not
that it lacks word balloons ( though other scholars would take that to be i mportant— see Carrier
2000 and Harvey 2001). Rather, it fails to be a comic because it is a single image, not multiple images
in a sequence. Multiple images, I argue elsewhere ( Pratt 2011), is required of works belonging
to the category of comics but not of works belonging to the category of cartoons— the kind of
humorous drawings with captions one finds in The New Yorker.
A better case can be made for Lichtenstein’s As I Opened Fire ( 1964). Again inspired by All-
American Men of War ( this time #90, from 1962, drawn by Jerry Grandenetti), this painting,
unlike Blam, is a triptych that portrays a sequence of panels. While minimally so, the sequence
is narrative, unified not only by the repeated images of an airplane firing guns, but also by the
“ voiceover” in narrative boxes ( presumably by the airplane’s pilot). In effect, As I Opened Fire has
the features that are typically used to recognize that something is a comic: a combination of visual
and verbal elements working together in concert to tell a story by means of spatially juxtaposed,
serially arranged pictures.
Is As I Opened Fire a comic painting? This is a hard question to answer because, as the saying
goes, one person’s modus ponens is another person’s modus tollens. If comics is an autographic,
two- stage, multiple artform, as the standard ontology would have it, then As I Opened Fire is not
a comic. For while it is autographic, it is, like other paintings, o ne- stage and singular. But, for the
same exact reasons, if As I Opened Fire is a comic, then comics is not a t wo- s tage, multiple artform
( though it would still be autographic).
A reaction one might have to this situation is to abandon the standard ontology altogether. It
might be that distinguishing between autographic and allographic, one- stage and two- stage, and
single and multiple artforms does not provide useful ontological insight in the intended manner.
However, the defender of the standard ontology has other options ( but must be careful to avoid
question begging— i t will not do to rule out comic paintings merely by using the standard ontology).
One general strategy would be to deny the classification of As I Opened Fire and related works
as comic paintings by pointing to properties of comics that they will inevitably l ack— i n effect,
a generalized version of the considerations I advanced in the foregoing about Rake’s Progress and
Blam. Potential options include arguments to the effect that ( a) the comparative scale of paintings
is fundamentally different from that of comics ( see Carrier 2000; 74); ( b) paintings are art but
comics are not ( Schwartz 2004), so overlap is impossible; ( c) while painting and comics are both
artforms, the former is high art, whereas the latter is low art, and that boundary cannot be crossed;
and ( d) paintings of comics are not comics, but rather “ copies of comics... done in a different medium”
( Meskin 2012; 34).
Henry
John Pratt
260
I can only offer responses in brief. In order: ( a) there are plenty of small paintings and big comics; ( b) comics have penetrated the artworld to a degree that it is hard to rule them out as art ( see Beaty 2012; Chapter 8); ( c) the boundaries between high and low art are porous and cannot be used reliably to separate artforms; ( d) a painting of x can be an x, and physical composition is largely irrelevant to whether a work is a comic, provided that it can be used ( as paint can) to produce the requisite elements of comics. While it is notoriously difficult to prove a negative, I predict that comparable responses will be available in showing that no plausible definitions of comics and painting can be used to rule out the existence of comic paintings.
Another strategy, which I believe to be considerably better than the first, is to emphasize that the ontological classifications used in the previous section are not supposed to express exception-less truths about necessary properties of the categories. Rather, they fall into what Kendall Walton famously termed “ standard” conditions for the categories of comics and painting, which advert to properties shared by typical works within those categories and which tend to qualify works as members of those categories ( 1970; 339). As such, there will be works of both comics and painting that do not meet these conditions ( in Walton’s language, their properties are contrastandard for the categories in which they fall), and comic paintings need not fall smoothly into exactly one ontological slot.
Indeed, the retreat ( if it is a retreat) to standard conditions is ultimately the ending point of Meskin’s comics ontology ( 2007; 43). Meskin and I disagree about whether there can be comic paintings: he thinks the categories do not overlap. But perhaps it is an entailment of his own position that comics is only standardly autographic, two- stage, and multiple, together with the position that painting is only standardly autographic, o ne- stage, and singular, that As I Opened Fire is properly understood as both.
4 Painted Comics
No discussion of painting and comics would be complete without attention to, well, painted com-ics. While most comics are rendered in inks ( or, increasingly, digital media), others are painted in their entirety. This prompts the two questions that I will attempt to answer in this section. First, why bother making painted comics? And second, what does the putative existence of painted comics imply for the ontological generalizations with which we began?
Inked comics— p articularly those that employ a style of cartooning dependent on simplifi-cation and abstraction— a re able to be produced quickly and efficiently, key for an industry that tends to have fast- moving and rigid publication schedules. They also tend to be legible at small print sizes. Paint, as a medium, can of course be used to produce a range of effects ( one could paint quickly in a cartoon style). And it can be used in a limited way, as in Patrick McDonnell’s Sunday Mutts strips, which are often colored with a watercolor wash. But fully painted comics take a long time to make and are difficult to both print and read.
To explain why one might make comics entirely with paint, I would like to focus on the work of Alex Ross, the illustrator responsible for such classics as Marvel Comics’s Marvels ( 1994) and DC’s Kingdom Come ( 1996). Even though artists might not always have the best perspective on their own work, it is worth quoting Ross at length about why he uses paints:
[It] seems to cause the viewer to stop and linger over the images.... the advantage for me of painting in a realistic style has been a broad connection with an audience both inside and out-side comics, who have found that my images depict a story more fully, closer to what a read-er’s imagination can conceive. By that same token, though, a reader can more easily compare my work to reality, and my renderings don’t always measure up. Realism can [immerse us
Painting and Comics
261
deeply in the fiction, but it can] also take us out of the fiction that we’re trying to be immersed
in, so as a storytelling style it may have more chances to fail than to succeed.
( Abel and Madden 2012; 231)
According to Ross, the reasons for painting comics, in contrast to using “ simpler outlines or high
contrast lights and darks” ( Abel and Madden 2012; 231)— i .e., inked cartoons— a re ultimately that
they demand and can reward greater scrutiny and attention, they offer an appearance closer to reality
as the reader imagines it, and they thereby bring the reader more deeply into the story being told.
Why, exactly, would painted comics produce these effects better than inked cartoons? I believe
that the answer lies in a notion that I will raise without much defense: a version of medium specificity.
Briefly, the media out of which an artwork is made ( roughly, the materials and technologies
used to make it) afford and limit its specific capacities for representation and expression. To use
an example congenial to— t hough considerably more moderate than— t he pioneering theories of
Gotthold Lessing ( 1910; 91– 92), media used in visual arts like painting make it comparatively easy
to represent bodies at a single moment in time and difficult to represent actions that unfold over
time, whereas the media used in literature have exactly the opposite tendencies.
The media used in the creation of comics are no exception to this moderate claim about
medium specificity. Ross paints in color; the real world is perceived in color, at least by normal
human beings under standard conditions. The use of black- a nd- white media in comics will make
it more difficult to match up to prevailing standards of realistic depiction than painted comics do.
So will the use of grayscale, spot colors, zipatone, hand- tinting, f our- c olor offset printing, and
other traditional ways of incorporating different hues and saturations in comics. Paint gives artists
the capacity to employ an unlimited range of colors in an attempt to match our experiences of the
real world. With respect to this aspect of realism ( at least relative to the standards of the symbol
systems with which comics readers are most familiar), Ross’s claims about painted comics appear
to have some merit.
Nowadays, most comics are colored digitally, allowing for a range of shade and tone that rivals
traditional painting. On the face of it, this is effectively the digital equivalent of painting and
carries with it many of the same medium- s pecific tendencies as its analog ancestor. Ross himself
says that “ It doesn’t matter how it got painted, watercolors or whatever, it just matters what the
final effect is, which is a greater form of rendering the subject and delineating an experience for
the readers” ( Ross 2016). It is an open question why painted comics still exist if there is an easier
digital alternative. Whatever the answer, it probably will not be medium- s pecific, but have to
do with the personality and skills of artists— some just are not willing or able to work in digital
media— coupled with the prestige that fully painted works still command.
Less plausible is Ross’s idea that painted comics attract and warrant comparatively more attention
from the reader. It could be the case that Ross’s comics have this feature. But that would
be due to his particular way of using paint, not to the medium itself. Paint can be used to make
cartoons; inks can be used to make images as complex as anything Ross creates. Moreover, Ross
himself notes that “ some painted styles, including my own, may be ill- s uited to the speed with
which a reader might better absorb the story content” ( Abel and Madden 2012; 231). This does
not seem to be a matter of the greater degree to which readers compare his illustrations to reality
( why would that be particularly salient for painted panels as opposed to panels rendered with other
media?), but to other more typical mechanisms that readers seek out in narrative artforms: good
storytelling, rich characterization, suspense, and so on.
To close out this discussion, let us consider the relationship between painted comics and comic
paintings. As the terms I have chosen indicate, these are the reverse of each other. Comic paintings
are uncontroversially paintings, but controversially comics. Provided that the case can be made
Henry John Pratt
262
that comic paintings properly belong to both categories, perhaps a comparable case be made with respect to painted comics, which, by way of contrast, are uncontroversially comics and contro-versially paintings. Do we have any good reasons to think that painted comics are also paintings ( where “ paintings” here refers to the category of art)?
I argued in the foregoing that it is possible for paintings of comics also to be comics. To reiter-ate and develop that thought a bit further, that is because there are no physical media characteristic of the comics category: comics can be made out of anything that allows for the right kinds of formal and, possibly, historical features (l eaving open here the question of what those are). There are physical media characteristic of painting: at a minimum, paint (e mphasizing that this is a rough and provisional claim, no doubt problematized by other contributions to this volume). Since com-ics and paintings can both be made out of paint, comic paintings are possible. But that does not entail that painted comics are comic paintings.
Paintings are not merely objects that are painted. Obviously, there are plenty of painted o bjects—h ouses, furniture, bicycles, tchotchkes, and so f orth—t hat are not paintings. But these are simply objects with paint applied to them: not quite akin to painted comics, which are some-thing more than that. At root, painted comics like those of Ross start off with paint applied to a surface in order to satisfy depictive goals. While that is not necessary for being a painting (s ince not all paintings are pictures), it is plausibly sufficient, at least when conjoined with the possibility that comics can be art.
There is a final complication to confront, which returns us to the standard ontology. Even if, in light of the immediately foregoing, Ross’s painted comics are paintings, the medium in which they are almost certainly encountered by readers is not paint, but print ( or digital images). Moreover, a reader with a print version of Kingdom Come has a genuine copy of that comic, since ( a) comics is a multiple artform ( allowing for multiple authentic copies to exist), ( b) comics is an autographic artform, and ( c) the print copy was mechanically generated from the original art. The copy is a painted comic in the sense that Kingdom Come was originally generated using paints, but not a painted comic in the sense that it ( the print copy of Kingdom Come) is not made out of paint.
Kingdom Come, then, is not essentially made of paint, in the sense that its identity conditions do not depend on being constituted of paint. Arguably, anything not essentially made of paint is not a painting. It follows that Kingdom Come cannot be both a painting and a comic.
However, Ross’s original works muddle the issue. These are, of course, made of paint, essen-tially so. If they were not made of paint, then they would not be Ross’s originals. The key question is: do they also constitute a genuine instance of the Kingdom Come comic? If comics is essentially two- s tage, they are not genuine, any more than the engraved plates used as the templates for the printed versions of Rake’s Progress are genuine instances of Rake’s Progress. If comics is only stan-dardly t wo- s tage, the position at which we arrived at the close of the previous section, then it is at least possible for the first stage— Ross’s original p aintings— to be a genuine instance of the comic.
That this is no mere possibility is supported by a key difference between printmaking and comics. The goal in printmaking is to produce works that appear in a particular medium: print. Preliminary or intermediate physical objects generated in service of that goal are not themselves the final artworks. The goal in comics, by way of contrast, is not to produce works that appear in a particular medium. Rather, the goal is to make a comic. While it so happens that most comics do appear in the medium of print ( or its digital equivalent), unlike prints, this is not a requirement. Physical media are irrelevant to status as a comic. Like As I Opened Fire, if Ross’s paintings meet whatever the required formal and historical criteria are for being a comic, then they are a comic. They require no further execution ( e.g., printing) to be experienced by audiences. And if the originals were to have all of the same c omic- r elevant perceptual properties as the print version of Kingdom Come, it would be hard to conclude that they do not comprise a copy of Kingdom Come, albeit one made with comparatively unusual media.
Painting and Comics
263
Not only can the categories of painting and comics overlap, but so can the sub- categories of
comic paintings and painted comics. While this does not provide us with reasons to abandon the
standard ontology entirely, it does result in a modest interpretation on which that ontology only
captures regularities that are subject to major exceptions. And it inspires further questions about
categories of art. In Walton’s framework, works can belong to multiple categories at once. However, it has been little noticed that works can belong to artkind categories of the same “grain,”
in this case, painting and comics, rather than merely categories that are nested (e.
g., comics and
superhero comics) or one artkind category and one stylistic category (e.
g., painting and abstract
expressionism). How this is possible and what entailments it has for the popular Waltonian framework of art categorization is a fascinating problem, but one that will have to be investigated
elsewhere.
Further Reading
For more discussion of medium specificity and an argument against a strong version thereof, see Carroll, N.
(1985)
“The Specificity of Media in the Arts,” Journal of Aesthetic Education 19(4): 5– 20. Many fine examples of painted comics can be found in Lawrence, C. (writer) and Ross, A. (Ed.)
(2016)
The Art of Painted
Comics, Mt. Laurel, NJ: Dynamite Entertainment; and Ross, A. (2005)
Mythology: The DC Comics Art of
Alex Ross. New York: Pantheon.
Bibliography
Abel, J. and Madden, M. (2012)
Mastering Comics, New York: First Second.
Beaty, B. (2012)
Comics versus Art, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Blackbeard, B. and Crain, D. (1995)
The Comic Strip Century: Celebrating 100 Years of an American Art Form,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Kitchen Sink Press.
Carrier, D. (2000)
The Aesthetics of Comics, University Park, PA: Penn State University Press.
Danto, A. (1964)
“The Artworld,” Journal of Philosophy 61(19):
571–
584.
Goodman, N. (1968)
Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Harvey, R. (2001)
“Comedy at the Juncture of Word and Image: The Emergence of the Modern Magazine
Gag Cartoon Reveals the Vital Blend,” in R. Varnum and C. Gibbons (Eds.),
The Language of Comics,
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, pp. 75– 96.
Harvey, R. (2009)
“How Comics Came to Be,” in J. Heer and K. Worcester (Eds.),
A Comics Studies Reader,
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, pp. 25– 45.
Hayman, G. and Pratt, H.J. (2005)
“What
Are Comics?,” in D. Goldblatt and L.B. Brown (Eds.),
Aesthetics: A Reader in the Philosophy of Art (2nd ed.), Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice Hall, pp. 419– 424.
Lessing, G. (1910
[1766]) Laocoön: An Essay upon the Limits of Painting and Poetry, trans. E. Frothingham,
Boston, MA: Little, Brown, & Company.
McCloud. S. (1993)
Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art, New York: HarperCollins.
Meskin, A. (2007)
“Defining Comics?,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 65(4): 369–
379.
Meskin, A. (2012)
“The Ontology of Comics,” in A. Meskin and R.T. Cook (Eds.),
The Art of Comics: A
Philosophical Approach, Malden, MA: Wiley- Blackwell, pp. 31– 46.
Pratt, H. (2011)
“Relating Comics, Cartoons, and Animation,” in D. Goldblatt and L.B. Brown (Eds.),
Aesthetics: A Reader in Philosophy of the Arts (3rd ed.), Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice Hall, pp. 369– 373.
Ross, A. (2016)
“Alex
Ross on ‘The Art of Painted Comics’,” interview by C. Holub, EW.com, available at:
ew.com/article/2016/06/15/alex-ross-art-
painted- comics/ (accessed September 1, 2019).
Schwartz, D. (2004
[1952]) “Masterpieces as Cartoons,” in J. Heer and K. Worcester (Eds.),
Arguing Comics,
Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi, pp. 52– 62.
Walton, K. (1970)
“Categories of Art,” Philosophical Review 79(3): 334– 367.
264 DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-33
27
THE MEDIUM ( RE) VIEWED
Returning to an Excursus on Painting, Film,
and Photography
Kristin Boyce
Philosophical and theoretical ( if not also practical) investigation into the power and possibilities of
film as an art began with questions about the relationship of film to painting. To many, it seemed
obvious that film could not be an art because of the ways it differed from painting. What made
painting an art, so the story goes, was the hand of the artist: the combination of painstaking craft
and inexplicable genius that were the condition for the possibility of its representations. By contrast,
the representations constitutive of a film— t he series of images in the motion picture— w ere
the product of a machine, a camera. Given the mechanical, i.e., photographic basis of its medium,
how could film be an art?
Theorists such as Noel Carroll and Victor Perkins have underscored the legacy of this defensive
starting point for the development of philosophy and theory of film. Carroll in particular has argued
that one costly implication has been a deeply ingrained habit of according to questions about
medium a significance which they simply do not have. This has led him to go so far as to suggest
that we in effect go cold turkey, eliminating from our philosophical and theoretical vocabulary a
concept that no longer does any real work.
Recent work that returns to questions about the relationship between painting, film, and photography
might seem to provide powerful reasons to follow Carroll’s recommendation. In “ Why
Photography Matters as Art as Never Before,” Michael Fried, one of the staunchest defenders of
the artistic, critical, and philosophical importance of medium, has seemed to more than one interpreter
to have been forced ( whether he is willing to fully acknowledge it or not) to give up on
anything that could justly be called a commitment to medium specificity.
The question of whether there is any real work for the concept of medium to do?— i s one that needs
to be taken seriously. In my view, though, the best response to it is yes. The problems that Carroll
so clearly identifies are important ones; they shed light on significant and persistent ways that the
concept of an artistic medium has been misunderstood and misused. But the opportunity that his
criticisms afford, especially when considered in combination with Fried’s recent return to questions
about the relation between painting film and photography, is best construed, is the opportunity to
get clearer about the axis around which our real need for this concept, in the present moment, turns.
The remainder of this chapter is divided into three parts. Part One introduces what I take to
be the two primary reasons Carroll gives us to consider swearing off the concept of medium: first,
that the habit of according so much importance to the concept of medium is part of a defensive
legacy that continues too often to undermine the efficacy of film and media studies; second, that
attention to individual films shows that medium just doesn’t have the kind of artistic importance
The Medium (Re)viewed
265
it has consistently been accorded. Part Two argues that in the early writing on modernism that
Fried develops together with Stanley Cavell, one can see the promise that it might be possible
both to acknowledge—even to agree with— Carroll’s criticism while at the same time recognizing
a genuine artistic and philosophical need for the concept of medium that persists. This promise
depends, I argue, upon the particular way that Cavell and Fried criticize two interrelated aspects
of Clement Greenberg work ( even as they also build upon): ( 1) the character of the s elf- r eflective
turn that in Greenberg’s view characterizes modernist art, and ( 2) Greenberg’s understanding of
what a “ possibility of a medium” itself consists in.
With these two criticisms of Greenberg clearly in view, we are in a better position to turn in
Part Three to the implications of Fried’s more recent writings for the concept of medium, which
might at least initially appear to show the promise held out by the earlier work to have been illusory.
What they point us to instead, I argue, is the need to turn attention to a third aspect of
Greenberg’s framework, what I call the “ map picture” of the relationship between the arts, that has,
for the most part, gone unexamined. I show that it is this picture, not the concept of medium, that
we have good reason to let go of, and that if we do, we will be in a better position to at least begin
to see the real work there is for the concept of medium to do.
Part One: Reasons to Think Carefully about Giving Up the Concept of Medium
The questions that Carroll raises about the concept of medium are tied to his deep investment in
what he proposes to call the art of motion pictures. As he understands it, the importance that theorists
have been so eager to accord to medium is a function of, and also functions to maintain, the
legacy of the defensive position from which it began, a legacy with which it continues to struggle.
One powerful strategy for securing film’s status as an art was in effect to show how what might
appear to be most problematic about film artistically is in fact its greatest strength: to show, in
other words, the depth and power of the artistic potential that film has precisely in virtue of, not
in spite of, the mechanical basis of its medium. A paradigmatic example of this kind of a strategy
is found in the work of Andre Bazin. If the artistic power of all the other arts depends upon the
“ the presence of man,” Bazin argues, only that of photography [and therefore film] depends upon
“ his absence.” That absence, Bazin argues, allows film and photography to free “ the object of habit
and prejudice, of all the mental fog with which our perception blurs it, and present it afresh for our
attention and thereby our affection” ( Bazin, 1967; 18). So understood, the mechanical basis of film
is not something that needs to be overcome if film is to be an art; it is the very heart of the unique
power that the art form, at its best, has.
The idea here is simple and powerful. Yes, the camera is important and valuable as a tool for
recording and preserving other art forms. ( For example, some of the earliest films were recordings
of dance and dancers.) But the artistic potential or value of the camera is not limited to its this
capacity to record/ preserve performances. That very same capacity of the camera to record what
is in front of it can also be the basis of a powerful new form of art, a condition for the possibility
of forms of artistic power or achievement. In other words, there are artistic possibilities that are
unique to the camera, where the relevant contrast is to uses of the camera to create a record of an
artistic achievement to which it does not contribute.
It is one thing to argue that the camera might contribute to artistic power or achievement
( instead of just recording it). It is another to suggest that there are some forms of artistic power or
achievement that only the camera makes possible. And it is yet a significant further step to insist
that the artistic achievement of a film depends entirely upon whether and how fully it realizes
those artistic possibilities that are unique to the camera. It is this significant further step that film
Kristin
Boyce
266
theory, as Carroll understands it, lost itself in. Overtime, the strategies born out of the exciting,
polemical moment of early theorists like Bazin and Shaw harden into unexamined and widely
shared assumptions that simply are not born out by careful attention to films themselves: ( 1) the
assumption that there is a finite set of “ possibilities” unique to the medium of film and ( 2) the
assumption that the artistic value of a film derives from the way it exploits or mobilizes them.
These assumptions are reflected in a theoretical discourse in which the concept of medium is
assigned a role to which it is not suited: that of an axiom in a deductive argument. “ The history
of film theorizing,” Carroll argues,
Has been dominated by a conception of what a film theory should be in terms of the model of
a unified body of ideas with certain core propositions from which conclusions about concrete
cases follow in various ways, once certain empirical possibilities are considered.
( Carroll, 1998; 359)
The idea that holds so many theorists in its thrawl. Carroll argues that these necessary core propositions
are obtained by spelling out the “ unique possibilities of the medium” of film. The blind
faith is that from such propositions, combined with the right empirical minor premises about a
particular film, unerring critical judgments can be derived. If, however, we can free our looking
from what our theoretical prejudices dictate must be the case, Carroll argues, what we see is that
some of the best sequences in some of the best movies depend on nothing more nor less than that
most mundane capacity of the camera to record a performance. The “ Oceana Roll” sequence
from Chaplin’s Gold Rush is his favorite case in point:
The Tramp, in order to entertain some lady friends, takes two dinner rolls and attaches them
to two forks, proceeding then to execute an exquisite mime of a dance— t he rolls serving as
feet and the forks as legs. It is pantomime pure and simple.... No special feature of the motion
picture medium like editing or depth of field are in evidence.
( Carroll, 2019; 33)
If one compares this sequence to Mack Sennet’s Keystone Kop comedy, Lizzies of the Field, which
is full of virtuosic camera work, it is clear that Chaplin’s use of the camera could not be more
pedestrian or mundane. And yet, no critic in their right mind would argue that Lizzies of the Field
is a greater work of film art than “ The Oceana Roll.”
In diagnosing this problem, Carroll shifts from a theoretical to a practical register. The problem
is that the possibilities of the medium simply cannot play the role that we have assigned them, that
of the axioms in a deductive system. To assign them this role, Carroll argues, is in effect to treat
them as “ ends in themselves” where properly understood they are merely the means to the film
maker’s ends. Medium specificity theories
Makes it sound as though being true to the medium or being pure is good for its own sake or
intrinsically good. But that would appear to contradict or, at least, to misconstrue the very
idea of what it is to be a m edium— t hat is, a means. A medium, in other words, is instrumentally
valuable, if it is valuable at all.
(Ibid.; 34)
And if in fact all we are talking about are means to the artistic ends of the film maker, what real
work is there for the concept of medium to do? Therefore, if we simply drop the concept of medium,
very little would be lost and a great deal might be gained in the service of avoiding confusion
and breaking bad habits.
The
Medium (Re)viewed
267
Part Two: Yes, but....
If we turn our attention to Clement Greenberg’s influential theoretical essay about modernism,
especially in painting, it can shed light on what might have eased or encouraged the transition
from the defensive starting point with which film studies begins to the entrenched theoretical
commitments that rightly trouble Carroll. For these theoretical writings of Greenberg’s can help
us to place the efforts of early theorists to defend the emerging art of film by working out its position
with respect to established forms within the context of paintings own struggles with defensiveness.
As Greenberg describes it, modernism in both the arts and philosophy takes shape in
response to the devaluation of the arts in the enlightenment:
Having been denied by the enlightenment all tasks they could take seriously, they looked as
though they were going to be assimilated to entertainment pure and simple... The arts could
save themselves from this leveling down only by demonstrating that the kind of experience
they provided was valuable in its own right and not to be obtained from any other kind of
activity.
( Greenberg, 1993; 86)
In its first iterations that devaluation and response were not limited to the arts, Greenburg characterizes
the strategies, which the arts found for “ saving” themselves, by comparing them to the
strategies that Kant finds for saving logic: “ Kant used logic to establish the limits of logic and
while he withdrew much from its old jurisdiction, logic was left all the more secure in what
there remained of it...” ( Ibid.; 86). In other words, Kant, as Greenberg understands him, uses
the procedures of logic to do two things: first, to demonstrate that there are forms of knowledge
which those procedures and only those procedures could make available, and second, to clarify
the limits of those procedures by showing that they cannot provide certain kinds of knowledge
that they had traditionally been taken to provide. The arts, as Greenberg understands them, follow
this same basic strategy in saving themselves. Each art found itself tasked with demonstrating
“ through its own operations and works, the effects exclusive to itself.” With respect to the arts,
Greenberg argues, this took the form of demonstrating the effects unique to the medium of a
given art:
It quickly emerged that the unique and proper idea of competence of each art coincided with
all that was unique in the nature of its medium. The task of s elf- criticism became to eliminate
from the specific effects of each art any and every effect that might conceivably be borrowed
from or by the medium of any other art.
(Ibid.; 87)
One can see in the story that Greenberg tells the conditions for the possibility of the kind of fixation
on medium that Carroll argues take hold in film theory. The need for defense may arise for
film differently, and indeed in part because of painting’s relative success in justifying itself and
securing its position as an established art form, but when film moves to defend itself, it does so
by taking over the strategy of its older sibling( s), that is, by demonstrating the “ effects” that are
unique to its medium. Bazin is exemplary here not only as a critic who “ defends” film by highlighting
the possibilities unique to its medium but also because in the process, he also turns his
attention to the clarification of the limits of the individual arts. For one implication of the emergence
of film and photography is to “ free” painting from “ its obsession with likeness” and to free
it to focus instead on those effects that are possibilities unique to its medium, whatever those may
be ( Bazin, 1967; 12). George Bernard Shaw makes a similar point with respect to theater, arguing
Kristin
Boyce
268
that film will “ kill that theaters which are doing what film does better” and help to focus efforts
instead on “ theater which does what film cannot do at all” ( Shaw, 1997; 25).
In their early writings, Fried and Cavell develop their conception of modernism by building
upon but also criticizing Greenberg’s work. In doing so, they pay special attention to what they
take to be significant tensions between the understanding of modernism that guides and is implicit
in Greenberg’s practice as a critic and the account of modernism that is explicit in his more widely
cited theoretical essays. On the basis of careful attention to the former, they develop a conception
of modernism by criticizing, or so I will argue, just those aspects of Greenberg’s “ theory” that
most strongly echo those parts of film theory that most trouble Carroll: ( 1) Greenberg’s conception
of modernism as originating as a form of self- j ustification or defense and ( 2) a conception of the
“ possibilities of a medium” as irreducible essences or timeless conditions for the possibility of an
art form. What is important about their conception of modernism for the present purpose is that
they open the possibility that if we take the problems that Carroll identifies seriously, we might
find ourselves not letting go of the concept of medium but instead clarifying the real artistic and
philosophical work there is for that concept to do.
The first way that Cavell and Fried depart from Greenberg is by criticizing and revising his
( theoretical) account of the modernist turn to medium in the first place. As we saw, Greenberg
construes that turn is a function of a pressure that is exerted on the arts from the outside: that is,
the arts find themselves under pressure to show, in the face of suspicion to the contrary, that they
can stand comparison with science. Because science shows itself to be so much better at satisfying
the search for knowledge than art could ever be, so the story goes, art finds itself under pressure
to demonstrate there is something— s omeone of comparable value— t hat it can provide. As Cavell
and Fried characterize it, by contrast, the modernist ( re) turn to medium is instead a function of
a pressure from the inside ( which, if it cannot be separated from external pressure in practice,
can surely be distinguished from it). As they understand it, the pressure that the modernist artist
faces is not first and foremost a pressure to demonstrate to someone else— perhaps a grant- giving
institution or government agency that holds the purse strings— t hat their art is just as valuable
as something else. It is instead a pressure to demonstrate to oneself that the ones work can stand
comparison with, as Fried puts it, work of the “ modernist or pre- modernist past whose quality
seems to him beyond question” ( Fried, 1998; 99 emphasis mine). The modernist artist, as Cavell
and Fried understand them, is not someone who makes art during “ a certain time period or whose
work bears certain p roperties— e.g., that of being ‘ difficult’ or ‘ self- reflexive’ or ‘ formally experimental’
( Boyce 2016; 153). The modernist artist is instead someone who stands in a particular
relationship to the past of their artform, someone who finds that she can no longer produce new
work that matters by relying upon the conventions that, in the past, could be relied upon in order
to produce such work.
What is important for the present purpose is to underscore how differently Cavell and Fried
“ go on” from a clear view of just those problems that Carroll also sees with what “ theory” makes
of medium. Their wager is that if we clear away such theoretical distortions, what we will find,
right at the heart of what remains most alive within an artform, is a different kind of impetus
to a renewed attention to questions about medium. One cannot, though, register that different
impetus without returning to the basic question of what is meant by a “ possibility of an artistic
medium.” It is by returning to this question that Cavell and Fried depart from Greenberg in a
second significant way. For Greenberg shares with those theorists who are Carroll’s direct targets
a conception of such possibilities as “ irreducible essences” or “ timeless conditions for the possibility”
of a given art form.
One place where Cavell directly invokes and criticizes such an “ essentialist” conception of
what is meant by “ the possibilities of a medium” is in an early passage from The World Viewed. In
an early section of The World Viewed, “ Types; Cycles or Genres,” Cavell carefully distinguishes the
The Medium (Re)viewed
269
“ possibilities of the medium” of film from what he calls its “ mere actualities of film mechanics”
( Cavell, 1971; 31). Procedures such as taking a photograph, cutting, editing, or taking shots from
different angles do not in and of themselves constitute “ possibilities of the medium” of the artform
of film. Considered in isolation they are “ mere actualities of film mechanics” that home movies
and news reels make use of just as surely as do exemplary instances of the art of film ( or, if you
like, motion pictures). The point here is that it is only in their application— t hat is, only insofar
as someone figures out how to use cutting, editing, etc. to make art, to make film ( as Cavell puts
it, to “ make sense” or “ get through to someone”) that these mere actualities become “ aesthetic
possibilities of the medium of film.” Insofar as the right way to describe someone is as using these
mechanical actualities, which may be used in all other kinds of ways, to make film, the right way
to describe them is as using the possibilities of the medium of film. To add “ to make film” would
be fine but redundant because it is only insofar as they are being used to make film that these
mechanical actualities are possibilities of the medium of film.
One can start to see what matters about the distinctions Cavell makes by returning to the
“ Oceana Roll” sequence from Gold Rush. Notice that as Cavell has glossed “ the possibilities of a
medium,” there is certainly no basis for judging this sequence to be aesthetically lesser than one
that requires some super- duper mastery of the most specialized uses of the camera. To the contrary,
it offers one way to deepen our appreciation for what makes Gold Rush such a wonderful
movie. Just look at what Chaplin has been able to make out of the capacities of the camera so ordinary
and mundane ( who couldn’t hold a camera up to record a dance performance) that one might
have thought ( assumed) they couldn’t have any artistic significance? One way to do justice to, even
deepen, our appreciation for exactly what he has achieved is perhaps to say that he discovers how
to make artistic sense out of this most mundane of the “ mechanical actuality” of the camera; in his
hands, those actualities become, are shown to be, possibilities of the medium of film.
In The World Viewed, Cavell’s discussion of “ the possibilities of a medium” is meant to shed
light on the birth of a new art form. In the writings on modernism that he develops with Fried, by
contrast, the question is instead what role a turn to medium plays in the struggle of an art form to
be reborn. Consider an example that matters a great deal to both Fried and Cavell, the example of
the sculptor, Anthony Caro. Caro, as Cavell glosses him, finds himself unable to create sculpture,
which convinces him that it can stand comparison with great sculpture of the past, by employing
any of the methods that might have seemed necessary for something to be sculpture, that is by
“ working” his material in some way, whether carving, chipping, polishing, etc. What makes Caro
so important, Cavell argues, is that he finds a new way of working— b y “ placing” his material—
that is so different that it would not be recognizable as a way of making sculpture were it not for the
fact that the work produced has the power that great sculpture h as— that, as Cavell puts it, we
are “ stuck with the knowledge” that it is sculpture ( Cavell, 2003; 216 & 218). Part of what makes
such work so important is that it makes it possible for us to reconsider and appreciate anew even
sculpture that is the most traditional.
On one hand, it is quite clear that the “ possibilities of the medium,” as they are understood in
the example of Caro do not and could not play the role of axioms in a deductive argument about
the nature of sculpture. For part of what the new possibilities that Caro “ discovers” make evident
is that the very conventions might have been assumed to be “ necessary conditions” for something’s
being sculpture ( as Cavell put is it, “ I had— I take it everyone had— t hought... that a piece of
sculpture was something worked”) are not necessary. Equally important, there is no way to determine
in advance those possibilities that Caro discovered by making the sculpture that he makes.
On the other hand, Cavell and Fried give us, I think, good reason to at least hesitate to follow the
deflationary moral that Carroll proposes, namely, that once we recognize that medium talk cannot
be fit to a familiar model of deductive reasoning, our best bet ( maybe our only remaining option)
is to recognize it as having the familiar means/ end form of practical reasoning instead.
Kristin Boyce
270
One reason that Cavell and Fried give us to pause before taking this further step is that they
create a vantage to at least consider what might prove to be important differences between ordinary
practical cases of “ getting the job done” and exemplary artistic achievements like Chaplin’s. In
ordinary practical cases, it is often possible to take any number of means to a given end: if my job is
to get you a message, I might get that done equally well by texting, emailing, speaking to you, or
leaving a message on your cell phone. In order to properly appreciate what I have achieved, you do
not necessarily need to know anything at all about how I did it. Unless some special circumstance
obtains, who cares which of these interchangeable means I employed. The point is what I did: I got
you the message. It is not at all clear that the same could be said about what Chaplin achieves. Does
it make the same kind of sense to assume that there are ( could anyone produce the same kind of
list of ) multiple interchangeably good means that Chaplin could have taken to the end that turned
out to be Gold Rush? If not, how much ( and in what way exactly) does that matter? And can we
really ( fully) appreciate what Chaplin did without appreciating that he created this most wonderful
of films out of the most mundane and ordinary mechanical actualities of the camera? In this case,
isn’t how he did what he did an integral part of what he did?
The possibility that opens here is this: perhaps our real need for the concept of medium, as
Cavell and Fried elucidate it, lies in our need to have an adequate way to register and how deeply
the distinction between how ( means) and what ( end), which is constitutive of practical reasoning,
differs from the distinction between how ( medium) and what ( work) that is constitutive of the
basic shape that talk about art takes. In other words, perhaps a medium can be equated to a means
no more easily or successfully than it can be equated to an axiom.
Part Three: Medium and the Map Picture
I concluded Part Two by beginning to spell out one way to understand what our real artistic and
philosophical need for that concept might be. It is important to acknowledge that the “ real need” I
started to sketch differs substantially from the pressing need that Cavell and Fried themselves identify.
By their own early lights, the artistic and philosophical importance of the modernist turn to
medium is a function of a pressing need to insist upon the “ radical” distinction between the arts.
As Cavell explains to critics of The World Viewed, the concept of modernism that he shares with
Fried takes its point from the space it holds open between modernist art and the “ avant garde”:
I have used the term modernist, not originally, to name the work of an artist whose discoveries
and declarations of his medium are to be understood as embodying his effort to maintain
the continuity of his art with the past of his art, and to invite and bear comparison with the
achievements of his past. The term is not meant to cover everything that may be thought of as
advanced or avant-garde in art. On the contrary, it suggests to me a wish to break into ( certain
uses of ) the concept of the avant-garde at at least three points: into its implication that advanced
art looks away from the past toward the future; into its tendency toward promiscuous attention
to any and all claims to advancement, together with a tendency to cede the concept of art
altogether, at any rate, to cede the idea of the arts as radically distinguished from one another,
which is the sensible significance of the “ pure” in art.
( Cavell, 1971; 216)
And as Fried sums things up in one of his most polemical professions of medium specificity,
“ Everything that lies between the arts is theater” ( Fried, 1998; 164).
I turned to the early writings of Cavell and Fried in the first place because they promised to
make it possible both to recognize those problems that Carroll identifies, and which lead him
to raise the question of whether we better off “ forgetting the medium” while at the same time
The
Medium (Re)viewed
271
holding open a space for recognizing the continued philosophical and artistic importance of that
concept. Especially if one concentrates upon the real need for medium that Cavell and Fried
themselves most consistently foregrounded in their early writings, it might that some of Fried’s
more recent writings close that space down.
Consider, for example, Fried’s discussion of the photography of Jeff Wall in Why Photography
Matters as Art as Never Before. What matters too much about Wall’s work, Fried argues, is that his
work returns to and inherits from painting
The entire problematic of b eholding— in the terms defined in my previous writing, of theatricality
and antitheatricality— t hat had been central, first to the evolution of painting France...
and second, to the opposition between high modernism and minimalism in the 1960s.
( Fried, 2008; 2)
What is artistically most important, in other words, is the way that Wall’s photographs stand
comparison at one and the same time ( although not, perhaps, in exactly the same way) with past
works whose quality Fried takes to be beyond question. Similarly, he draws attention to exactly
those aspects not just of Wall’s work but also the work of Cindy Sherman and others, which raise
questions about the deep relationship between photography and film. These artists, he argues,
each respond “ in different ways to the problematic status of movies in this regard by making photographs
which, although mobilizing one or another convention of movies... also provide a certain
essential photographic distance from filmic experience” ( Ibid., 13). The power of these works,
in other words, lies precisely in the light they shed on the relationships between photographic
and filmic experience. That power depends upon the capacity that these photographs have to
“ mobilize” possibilities of the medium of movies.
Fried admits that his commitment to medium specificity has changed and that he is no longer
committed to the polemical claim that “ everything that lies between the arts is theater” ( in the
pejorative sense). One place where he addresses this most directly is in the conclusion to Four
Honest Outlaws1:
Although this book singles out artists whose work seems to me to prove the current vitality
of high modernist themes and issues, it also demonstrates that that vitality is not tied to a
specific medium, or to put this more strongly, that the question of medium- specifiticy, while
not exactly irrelevant to the artists I discuss...no longer plays the kind of role that it did at an
earlier moment in the history of modernism.
( Fried, 2011; 204)
What are the implications of what Fried finds for the space, which his earlier work with Cavell
seemed to hold open, for recognizing a real ( present) need for the concept of medium?
At least one powerful critic of Fried’s, Diarmuid Costello, gives us good reason to suspect
that it has now become evident that this “s pace” was an illusion to begin with. “ If it turns out,”
Costello asks, “ that a photograph can be made to stand comparison to past painting, or vice
versa, in the relevant sense, what happens to the idea of medium specificity in Fried’s account?”
( Costello, 2008; 296). His own answer is that the “ very idea of an artistic medium” that can do
any real work “ threatens to dissolve” altogether ( Ibid., 2 96– 297).
In the remainder of this section, I argue that there is a better way to understand the implications
of what Fried finds. What Fried’s discovery both requires and makes possible is a reconsideration
of a third aspect of Greenberg’s account that has for the most part remained unexamined: what I
will call the “ map picture” of the arts. I show that if we isolate and criticize that picture, what we
find is not that our apparent need for the concept of medium dissolves altogether but rather that
Kristin Boyce
272
by disentangling that real need from the map picture, we put ourselves in a much better position
to understand more fully what that need is.
Recall that Greenberg’s theoretical story turns on a comparison between the condition of philosophy
and that of the arts. Kant, he argues, uses logic to establish the limits of logic, where what
that amounts to is using the procedures of logic to establish that there are some forms of knowledge
which those methods and only those methods can make available.2 The picture here is that of
a totality of what we know which, without the methods of logic, would correspond only partially
to the totality of what there is to know: a space of what there is to know with regions that would
remain forever unexplored and unmapped without the methods of logic. And it is not difficult to
see this picture transferring smoothly to the arts so that we have a picture of the totality of what
Greenberg calls “ effects,” some subset of which we would never experience, or never experience
fully, if we only had drama and sculpture but no painting. Or drama and painting but no film.
And for the uninterrupted operating of this picture, it doesn’t much matter whether one conceives
the totality of “ regions” as a totality of effects ( as Greenberg does), or of “ powers” ( as I have done)
or of “ problematics” ( as in the “ problematic of the beholder” à la Fried) or “ purposes” ( à la Carroll).
In other words, it has perhaps become both possible and pressing ( maybe even necessary) to
examine this part of the conception that Cavell and Fried, along with others, both inherit from
Greenberg and transform.
One way to put this point is to say that the conventions of painting ( or theater or dance or...)
that a modernist finds she can no longer rely upon include conventions about the relationship
between her artform and others, both how they hang together and how they are distinguished.
Think for example about the allegory of the Cave from Plato’s Republic, which as persistently
shadowed film theory. On one hand, this allegory has struck more than one film theorists as a
prescient anticipation of an art form that did not actually develop for several millennia that captures
its s pecifics— i .e., the basic ways in which it differs from other a rts— i n an almost uncannily
accurate way. On the other, one role of the allegory within the Republic is to capture something
that is shared by the arts. with which Plato is especially concerned in The Republic, namely, the very
different ways that painting and poetry ( whether epic or tragic) reinforce a kind of deformation or
disorganization to which we as humans are uniquely susceptible, given the specific kinds of creatures
we are. So understood, what the allegory captures is the sense in which thinking about film
will involve ( be shaped by/ make something of/ being responsive in some way to) both questions
about what distinguishes film as an art from others, and at the same time, what unites it to others
insofar as they are all forms of art.
Consider, for example, a painter who finds herself still able to rely upon conventions for making
painting ( conventions that might have seemed so basic as to be necessary conditions for something’s
being a painting). Part of what it is for her to rely upon those conventions is for her to take
for granted some understanding of what it is for her to make paintings as opposed to sculptures
or photographs or... She may spend a great deal of time worrying about whether her paintings are
good paintings or whether painting as an artform is valued the way it ought to be ( as much as literature
or music perhaps). But what she won’t spend time worrying about is whether what she makes
is painting or even art at all, or what could possibly count now as making painting ( or art) that
could matter to us the way painting (art) matters ( has always mattered), could stand comparison
with painting ( art) of the past of the past whose quality seems to her beyond question. The very
arising, the grip, of that kind of question is a manifestation of the failure of the conventions that
have been relied u pon— a manifestation, that is, of the condition of modernism. For it manifests
the loss of what ( at least in retrospect) might look like a conventional way to guarantee that something
is a painting ( sculpture, dance, musical composition, etc.). If the sculpture that Caro makes
is so different from what came before that there is no way of telling in advance of his making
sculpture like that that sculpture could look like that or be made that way, then the only candidate
The
Medium (Re)viewed
273
for a replacement “ guarantee” that it is sculpture will be the fact that we ( whoever we are) cannot
help but recognize it that way, perhaps as much to our own surprise as anyone else’s. And that will
look quite tenuous, in fact may hardly look like a guarantee at all.
It is not difficult to see how, in response to this kind of loss, it might be compelling to insist
upon the “ radical distinctness” of sculpture from the other arts. Perhaps at some “n ows” it might
seem ( or even be) the only compelling response. Perhaps, for instance, from the vantage of our
present moment, that is the best way to understand Caro’s now. The important point, though, is
this: insofar as there is no telling in advance of an achievement like Caro’s that sculpture could
look like that, or that that could be a way of making sculpture, there is also no telling in advance
what that work will make, what it will press us to make of the past and present relationship between
sculpture and the other arts.
So understood, an important part of what the work done by artwork such as Wall’s is to draw
to our attention—g ive us the opportunity to recognize/r emember—s omething that could not be
more obvious or matter of fact: where there is art, there are forms of art, even if what forms there
are, and how they are related to each other— h ow unified as forms of art; how differentiated—i s
constantly changing. And part of the work of any work— part of the way it individuates itself as
this work in the contexts of other works—i s to work out what to make of this obvious fact. There
is, though, no way to know in advance what a given work will make of this obvious fact.
Once one starts to get this possibility into view, it is striking how many important instances there
are of artistic achievement that within one artform that comes by way of, and cannot be fully appreciated
without, a willingness to reconsider the relationship of one artform to another. Henry James,
for instance, famously works his way through deep artistic impasse by finding a way to transform his
failure as a playwright into extraordinary novelistic virtuosity, that is, by finding a way to take what
he found most powerful in theater and translating that into a new method of working as a novelist.
Part of what becomes easier to see, if we clear away the “m ap picture,” is how— a nd how
deeply— the present and past of an artform ( or perhaps better, the present and past of the arts)
matter to each other. On an account like Greenberg’s, the present of an artform makes its past a
curiosity. The interest that can be taken in it is like the interest many are now inclined to take in the
stories that we once told ourselves about angry gods before we were in a position to provide a real
( scientific) explanation for why it rains. For an account like the one that Fried continues to evolve,
by contrast, the very condition for the possibility of new work that is artistically alive is work of
the past that remains artistically alive for it. This, as I now understand it, is the force of the claim
that for a photographer like Wall, or a sculptor like Caro, to succeed in making new work is for
them to make work that convince them that it can stand comparison with work of the past whose
quality seems to them beyond question.
If we disencumber ourselves of the “ map picture,” we can no longer conceive any “ real need”
we might have for the concept of medium in terms of a need to police boundaries between the
arts. Clearing away the map picture, though, does nothing but clear a space to think more fully
about the potential real need for the concept of medium that I began to explore in Part One.
Consider again the example of James. What is important about them for the present purpose—
i f you are willing to grant me that the quality of their work is beyond questions— i s this: they each
highlight the possibility of ceding the map picture without ceding what I have called the special
intimacy between how and what makes it possible to mark. Each seeks ( and finds) new life for
their art precisely by looking to another art form ( whether theater, literature, or dance). At the
same time, the very way in which they look to that other form underscores the centrality of their
preoccupation with how. The power of the work is a function of discovering how to do that (what
theater does) as a novelist. What cannot do justice to what they achieve only by focusing on the
that. To get their achievement in view, one has to appreciate how they did that (w hat theater or
literature or dance) as a novelist.
Kristin
Boyce
274
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to do more than seek to convince you that there is good
reason to pause before jumping too quickly to the conclusion that there is no longer an axis
around me for a real need for the concept of medium turns. In conclusion, though, I want make
two suggestions about how to start thinking more fully through what I have called the potential
“ real” need for a way to mark the depth of the difference between how ( means) and what ( end)
in typical practical cases and between how ( medium) and what ( work) in exemplary artistic ones.
The relation between means and ends is often spelled out as an “ in order to... ” relation. What I
want to suggest in closing is that the relation marked by the medium/ work distinction is better
construed by contrast as a “m ake (o ut) of... ” relation: look at what Chaplin was able to make out
of the most mundane capacities of the camera. So understood, what we need medium to mark is
the simple, fundamental fact that a work of art is made out of something (a s opposed to ex nihilo)
and that an essential part of appreciating the work is appreciating what the artist was able to make
out of his or her medium, which in part means locating it with what others have made or may in
the future prove able to make out of theirs.
One can, of course, speak of artistic achievement in means/ ends terms: it does not, perhaps,
sound less natural to speak of Chaplin’s achievement by talking about how he uses the camera in
order to make Gold Rush than to speak of what he was able to make out of the most mundane
capacities of the camera. But it is also worth noting that there are important cases where the
means/ ends formulation sounds quite forced. One especially salient case ( I am surprised to find
myself arguing) is to be found in Marx’s The German Ideology. In the early pages of this early work,
Marx proposes that what distinguishes humans is first and foremost that out of the environment in
which we are born and which we share with other animals, we make a world. This point simply
can’t be translated, at least not without considerable loss, into means/ end terminology: we use the
environment in order to make a world? My wager is that if we were to stay a bit longer with this
intriguing connection between the power of art and our capacities as world makers, we would
find that our philosophical and artistic need for the concept of medium is real.
Notes
1 I am indebted Mullhall ( 2018; 98) for this passage.
2 It is beyond the scope of this chapter to address questions about the adequacy of Greenberg’s reading as
a reading of Kant.
Works Cited
Bazin, A. ( 1967) What Is Cinema? Volume I. Berkley: University of California Press.
Boyce, K. ( 2016) “ In the Condition of Modernism: Philosophy, Literature and The Sacred Fount.” In Wittgenstein
and Literary Modernism, edited by K. Zumhagen- Yekplé and M. LeMahieu, 153– 175. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Carroll, N. ( 2019) “ Medium Specificity.” In The Palgrave Handbook of the Philosophy of Film and Motion Pictures,
edited by N. Carroll, L. T. Di Summa and S. Loht, 29– 48. Cham: Palgrave McMillan.
———. (2008) The Philosophy of Motion Pictures. Malden: Blackwell Publishing.
———. (1998) Interpreting the Moving Image. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cavell, Stanley. ( 1971) The World Viewed, Enlarged Edition. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
———. (2003) Must We Mean What We Say? New York: Cambridge University Press.
Costello, D. ( 2008) “ On the Very Idea of a ‘S pecific’ Medium: Michael Fried and Stanley Cavell on Painting
and Photography as Arts,” Critical Inquiry, 34, 274–312.
Fried, M. ( 1998). Art and Objecthood: Essays and Reviews. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Fried, M. (2 011) Four Honest Outlaws: Sala, Ray, Marioni, Gordon. New Haven and London: Yale University
Press.
———. (2008) Why Photography Matters as Art as Never Before. New Haven: Yale University Press.
———. (1998) Art and Objecthood: Essays and Reviews. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
The
Medium (Re)viewed
275
Greenberg, C. ( 1993) The Collected Essays and Criticism: Modernism with a Vengeance, 1957– 1969. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Mullhall, S. ( 2018) “ Deep Relationality and the Hinge- like Structure of History: Michael Fried’s Photographs.”
In Michael Fried and Philosophy: Modernism, Intentionality and Theatricality, edited by M. Abott.
New York: Routledge.
Perkins, V. ( 1973) Film as Film: Understanding and Judging Movies. New York: Penguin Books.
Shaw, G. B. ( 1997) George Bernard Shaw on Cinema, ed. by B. F. Dukore. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press.
276 DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-34
28
THEATER DANCE AS A COMPLEX
ARTFORM
Renee M. Conroy
1 Dance, Philosophy, and the Visual Arts
Questions of ontology ( what kind of thing is a work of dance art?) and identity ( what features are
essential to a given dance artwork?) have played a central role in the A nglo- American tradition
of thinking about theater dance for more than half a century ( Van Camp, 2019). These issues
continue to stimulate philosophical debate, as evidenced by recent publications in the field. Of
interest in this chapter is that contemporary theorists explicitly leave room in their accounts for
things other than movement structures, bodily designs, or dancing persons to play a constitutive
role in dance art creations.
For example, Graham McFee’s thesis of notationality articulates the identity conditions of
danceworks in terms of an “ adequate score” that provides a “ recipe” for instantiating the work
in performance ( McFee, 2011 and 2018). The adequacy of the instructions consists in their capacity
to articulate all of a work’s non- c ontingent features, including music, costuming, lighting,
props, and sets in cases where these are identity- r elevant. Similarly, Julie Van Camp’s pragmatic
approach recommends we regard two numerically distinct performances as instances of the same
work of dance art just in case they are “ determined by members of the dance art community
( including lay audience members, dance professionals and specially qualified experts) to exhibit
‘ substantial similarity’ as understood within the context of dance practice” ( Conroy, 2013; 115).
Because her view is modelled on the American legal process for securing copyright protection for
choreography, the basis of this communal “ same as” judgment is the danceworld’s appeal to some
standard supplied by the choreographer, where this might be a notation, a film, or any other form
of “ tangible fixation” that articulates what the creator deems to be w ork- d efinitive ( Van Camp,
2006 and 2019). Of concern in this context is that the d ancemaker- s upplied standard may include
the specification of various “ theatrical trappings,” hence, an i dentity- c onferring judgment by the
dance community may involve considerations about aspects of a performance other than the dancers’
bodily movements or the overall choreographic design of the piece.
More recently, Noël Carroll has suggested that questions of ontology – and, by extension,
identity – i n dance be approached by appeal to the “ constitutive purpose of the choreography,”
defined as those dancemaker’s aims “ that govern the choreographic choices that make the dance
what it is” ( Carroll, 2019; 72). He notes, however, that “ Very often . . . it is not only the choreographic
element that contributes to the constitutive purpose of the dance,” and highlights
the fact that his account “ does not preclude other factors from also making important contributions,
including, most frequently, music” ( Carroll, 2019; 7 3- 74). Alternatively, Anna Pakes’
Dance
277
mutually supportive treatments of dancework ontology and identity focus on indicated- structures
of a ction- t ypes and emphasize communal norms ( Pakes, 2020). Nonetheless, she also explicitly
acknowledges the central role often played by non- d ance elements, introducing her manuscript
chapter entitled “ Dance Identity” by offering the following description of her experiences with
Maguy Marin’s Umwelt (2004):
What transpired on stage in London also closely resembled what I saw in Cork: the striking
set of reflective panels, quivering in the blast of air tearing across the stage throughout the
performance; the emergence from and disappearance behind these panels of variously dressed
performers, carrying diverse objects; the grinding howl of the music as a cable unwound from a
spool stage left and onto a second spool stage right, across strings placed at the front of the space.
The presence of all of these elements seemed important to the performances being of Umwelt
( Pakes, 2020; 162)
In short, w ell- regarded 21st century philosophers recognize, in different ways, that dance as a theater
artform is complex in the sense that it generally involves more than a perceptually “ simple,” or
artistically o ne- d imensional, presentation of choreography or persons dancing. Even so, there has
been surprisingly little discussion in dance philosophy of the non-dance artforms that regularly
coalesce with patiently designed choreography to create the artistic whole to which audiences are
enjoined to attend and from which they are prescribed to make assessments about a dancework’s
expressive content, narrative arc, revolutionary character, relationships to other artworks, and
so forth. This chapter takes a first step toward expanding reflection on the importance of the
non-movement elements of traditional concert danceworks by considering the formative roles often
played by painting and sculpture in the creation and appreciation of works of theater dance art.
Three preliminary remarks are in order.
First, I will use the words “ painting” and “ sculpture” in extended senses. The former refers
to all two- d imensional images created by putting a tool to a swath of material, piece of paper, or
blank space; it includes drawings, murals, and action- p aintings, as well as oils, acrylics, or watercolors
as applied to traditional canvasses. By contrast, “ sculpture” denotes any t hree- d imensional
creation that is molded, cast, carved, or assembled; herein, I countenance as sculptures h andcrafted
costume pieces, props, and stage sets alongside archetypical examples by Michelangelo,
Constantin Brancusi, and Henry Moore. The phrase “ visual arts” refers to both paintings and
sculptures in the senses articulated, and I set aside complications introduced by lighting design.
Second, I describe the arts of theater dance as complex, rather than using more common descriptors
such as “ hybrid” or “ multi- media,” because I am wary of overgeneralization. After all,
painting and sculpture in my extended senses do not always matter in theater dance art, and that
fact matters. This is part of what makes the artform artistically complex, rather than quintessentially
hybrid ( like opera) or ineluctably m ulti- m edia ( like screendance). In some cases, there is
no music, costumes are irrelevant, no props are used, and there is no set to speak of. That said,
framing mechanisms supplied by the visual a rts – o ften in concert with aural contributions from
music, soundscores, or the dancers’ vocalizations – a re frequently very important to the identity
conditions of a particular work and are commonly crucial to audience members’ robust appreciation
of its choreographed components, as evidenced when one considers the oft- s tartling contrast
between viewing a studio rehearsal of a dancework’s “ bare choreography” and the experience of
seeing the final production on stage.
Third, I motivate this investigation by considering a potentially controversial example from
which lessons about the interpenetrations of dance and the visual arts can be drawn: Nelson
Goodman’s Hockey Seen. This case appears to be a “ dance- art outlier” for several reasons. First,
Renee
M. Conroy
278
the work was the artistic brainchild of a philosopher who was not a dancer and who did not create
any of its choreographic elements. Second, it was billed as a piece of experimental theater rather
than as a dancework. Third, it has not achieved standing in the pantheon of American a vant- g arde
dance creations from the 1960s and 1970s. I submit that, despite its unusual history, nothing bars
Hockey Seen from being regarded correctly as work of dance art. I also maintain it is an example
that philosophers of dance should consider with care because it reminds us of the artform’s entrenched
relationship( s) to painting and sculpture.
1.1 Hockey Seen
In 1972, Nelson Goodman presented his first multimedia art project, Hockey Seen: A Nightmare in
Three Periods and Sudden Death, to Harvard audiences. The piece was the product of creative work
undertaken by d irector- producer and s cript- writer Goodman, choreographer Martha Armstrong
Gray, composer John C. Adams, visual artist Katharine Sturgis, media artist Gerd Stern, and
mask- maker Ernie Higgins of the Boston Bruins ( later joined by sculptor Carole Sivin). In 1980,
again under Goodman’s direction, Hockey Seen was restaged and performed live in Belgium, while
a modified version of the stage production was recorded and aired on Belgian National Television.
The work was restaged once more for a performance at Harvard in 1984 that was filmed for
archival purposes.
Program notes describe Hockey Seen as follows:
On three huge screens, projected calligraphic drawings of hockey skaters interact with dancers
[in] hockey- like attire, who explore the gestures and rhythms of the sport with the vocabulary
of modern dance. This curious drama is impelled by a contrapuntal musical score played
on the electronic ARP synthesizer, and follows the basic structure of the hockey game which
ends unexpectedly in ‘ Sudden Death’
( Howard quoted in Carter, 2009; 62)
Further details are provided in the guide for a 2006 exhibition at Marquette University celebrating
the work, according to which Hockey Seen is an
... Innovative experiment... showing the interplay between the dancer’s movements and
large- scale media projections. These large multi- screen projections incorporate the drawings
of hockey players in motion and crowd scenes at a hockey game to create the ambience of an
actual hockey event
( Carter, 2006; 1)
Both synopses emphasize the multimodal character of the production, in which the dancers’
movements were both visually framed by – and kinetically responsive to – i mposing artistic renderings
of hockey players and video footage of screaming fans. Thus, they highlight the aesthetic
significance of the interactions between the dancing and several forms of visual art, suggesting that,
in this case, designed movement was but one element of a larger artistic whole.
One salient fact about Hockey Seen’s history is that the projected calligraphic images were based
on l ive- action sketches Goodman’s wife, Katharine Sturgis, drew while watching hockey on their
home TV in an attempt to “ capture motion and energy rather than a representation of the game”
( Carter, 2006; 1). These hasty doodles became the inspiration for the work because, as Curtis Carter
reports, “ the drawings suggested choreography to Goodman” ( Carter, 2009; 61, emphasis mine)
in virtue of their kinetic character. In response to the dance- like qualities possessed by Sturgis’
outlines of players in action, Goodman penned a script for the piece and constructed an artistic
Dance
279
team, including his wife, a choreographer, a composer, and a m ask- m aker, who collectively transformed
his sketch- based vision into theatrical reality.
Another revealing fact is that Goodman’s overarching motive was to create a performative
experience that could illustrate his influential theories about symbol- m aking and the cognitive
potential of art as articulated in Languages of Art ( 1968) and Ways of Worldmaking ( 1978) by
... Demonstrat[ing] how our whole perception and conception of the game alters drastically
by association with the distilled dynamism of the drawing, dance and music, while these take
on new characteristics and intelligibility in relation to the familiar s ubject- matter as it is also
being transformed
( Goodman unpublished manuscript quoted in Carter, 2006; 4)
Thus, the m ulti- faceted artistic character of Hockey Seen was central to Goodman’s project since
he intended to create a performable that could denote, exemplify, and express features of a hockey
match while also bridging appreciative chasms between art and sports and between art- enthusiasts
and those who “ won’t be seen dead looking at drawings or going to modern dance of all things”
( Goodman quoted in Carter, 2006; 1).
One way these goals were achieved was by placing contemporary dance vocabulary within
the optical milieu of Sturgis’ magnified sketches and footage of actual hockey games, which
generated a singularly dynamic visual environment within which the dancers’ movements took
place. Another mechanism employed was to hide the performers’ faces in meticulously sculpted
masks that transformed traditional modern dance choreography into the fictive representation
of a particular kind of sports event. On Goodman’s telling, the success of Hockey Seen depended
crucially on the degree to which the tightly constructed interactions between the dancing, the
sculpted costume pieces, and the projected paintings would sustain audience interest – a nd forge
new connections between the seemingly remote worlds of high art and sports entertainment – by
generating both direct and indirect referential relationships that could “ toy... constantly with our
expectations of what sport and art ought to be, embracing these disparate pieces of life into a richer
synthesis” ( Howard quoted in Carter, 2006; 2).
Hockey Seen is a valuable real- w orld “ puzzle case” because it raises substantive questions
about dance as an autonomous artform and the nature of authorship in dance- art contexts. In
what follows, I argue that Goodman’s experiment highlights two features of dance art that remain
under- e xplored in philosophical treatments of the artform: dance’s complex nature and its
( characteristically) collaborative character.
2 Is Hockey Seen Dance Art? Three Worries
One might be skeptical about whether Hockey Seen could qualify as a work of dance art, though its
appreciative focus is human bodies in motion and the choreography serves a variety of Goodmanian
symbolic aims. Hesitation emerges initially from the fact that the work is s elf- consciously multimedia.
But what, exactly, is the medium of dance art? Describing it minimally as movement is clearly insufficient:
this approach cannot begin to distinguish dance from wildly divergent artistic kinds, such
as kinetic sculpture. Even if dance’s medium is characterized as human movement – or as “ movings
and posings,” à la Monroe Beardsley – there are many disparate artistic traditions that exploit, systematically
depend on, or direct appreciative attention to it, including Noh theater and silent film.
To ensure that the appropriate categorization of artistic works retains an essential connection
to their associated media without oversimplifying the creative situation, Dominic McIver Lopes
recommends the following schema: “x is a work of K, where K is an art = x is a work in medium
profile M, where M is an appreciative kind, and x is a product of M-centered appreciative practice
Renee
M. Conroy
280
P...” ( Lopes, 2014; 158). The crucial question is whether Hockey Seen satisfies the final condition:
is it a product of the distinctive h uman- movement– centered appreciative practices that constitute
dance art? Or it is better understood as a different kind of work that just happens to utilize the
medium central to dance? Lopes would likely regard Hockey Seen as a potential “ free agent,” that
is, a work of art that either belongs to no particular artform or for which category membership
is legitimately controversial. Three facts about Hockey Seen might generate skepticism about its
potential to enjoy dance- art status.
First, Hockey Seen is not referenced in dance history or dance studies texts nor is it taught as
part of the standard curriculum educating dance majors and MFA candidates about 20th- c entury
American dance history. Its notable absence from the accepted academic canon of danceworks,
and from presentations on danceworld stages, could suggest that Hockey Seen is not regarded by
insiders as a d ance- a rt creation. Hence, one might argue that because it has not been “ taken up”
by those with a serious stake in dance art, it is not part of the relevant community’s appreciative
practice. Call this the Canon Concern.
Second, Hockey Seen is referred to by Goodman and others who have a vested interest in it,
including philosopher of dance Curtis Carter, as a “ multimedia art work,” a “ m ulti- l evel work of
art,” a “ multimedia performance project,” or a “ theatrical collaboration.” Goodman employs other
carefully qualified locutions, as when he describes Hockey Seen as “ a particular theatre piece involving
dance” ( Goodman, 1983; 80, emphasis mine) and writes that “ the work exemplifies, as does a
purely abstract dance, certain movements and patterns of movement, changes of pace and direction,
configurations and rhythms” ( Goodman, 1983: 81, emphasis mine). In public records, he never calls
the piece a dance( work), nor does he draw direct appreciative comparisons between Hockey Seen
and other paradigm cases of dance art, though he does take credit for authoring the work. So, if one
expands Kendall Walton’s “ Categories of Art” thesis and urges that authorial intentions carry substantive,
though not definitive, weight in establishing a rt- c ategory membership in virtue of their
role in establishing correct category perception, then Hockey Seen has good prima facie claim to be
some kind of n on- d ancework that utilizes dancing.1 Call this the Classification Concern.
Third, if Goodman is its author in the sense of being the generative artist who bears creative
responsibility for the finished work’s beauties and blemishes, then it might seem that Hockey Seen
could not be a work of dance art because it was authored by a person who was not embedded
appropriately in the dance artworld. Furthermore, Hockey Seen could be argued to lack a relational
property necessary for any creation made in the medium of human movement to qualify as a work
of dance art, viz., that of being created by an agent who generates novel movement sequences for
dancers to perform. Call this the Choreographic Concern.
3 Is Hockey Seen Dance Art? Three Worries Alleviated
The Canon Concern is the weakest of these skeptical challenges because canons are ever- evolving
and are notoriously problematic indicators of value. First, the mere fact that an artwork featuring
human movement does not appear in academic dance t exts – o r is not discussed regularly in dance
history classes or anthologies of dance c riticism – i s not, by itself, evidence that the danceworld
rejects it as a member of some recognized dance- art genre. Many works by famous choreographers
that are accepted unequivocally as dance- art creations do not appear in the “ historical canon”
because they have been effectively lost due to the passage of time.
Second, for better or worse, canons are by nature selective. Thousands of pieces for performance
regarded uncontroversially as works of dance art have been created in America in the last
century, but only a handful are referenced regularly by those who pursue dance studies. Indeed,
even for iconic choreographers such as George Balanchine, Trisha Brown, or Mark Morris, a
relatively small percentage of their d ance- art oeuvre is immortalized through repeated textual
Dance
281
analyses and on- going restagings. For every famous choreographer, there is a litany of lost works.
And for every publicly revered dancemaker, there are hundreds more whose creations never receive
widespread attention: it is a danceworld reality that most pieces of dance art are known by
only a small set of audience members and a select group of performers. But this unfortunate fact
never jeopardizes the average choreographic creation’s status as a work of dance art provided other
factors bind it to the relevant appreciative practice.
Finally, even the total absence of a m ovement-b ased work from dance texts, academic curricula,
and the contemporary stage is not evidence that the danceworld would reject the creation as a
paradigm case of dance art if confronted with the question. In fact, if today’s dance insiders were
asked to classify Goodman’s Hockey Seen, it is probable that they would regard it as appropriately
located in some category of dance art. Were it performed on a program alongside other canonical
modern danceworks of the period, Hockey Seen would not seem at all out of place. After all, the
1960s and 1970s American dance scene was dominated by an array of theatrical experiments that
explored minimalism, improvisation, multimedia presentations, and the relationships between
art and everyday life. Thus, even the savvy dance aficionado who attended such a retrospective
performance might be surprised to learn that Hockey Seen was the creative progeny of a famous
analytic philosopher rather than a relatively unknown work by David Gordon, Ralph Lemon, or
some forgotten Judsonite.
In addition, it is not difficult to construct a historical narrative of the kind recommended by
Noël Carroll for identifying art, one that describes Hockey Seen’s genealogy as “a n intelligible
contribution to an evolving [dance] artworld project” ( Carroll, 2008; 448). The most challenging
part might be determining where the story should begin. Given that Goodman did have significant
ties to the American danceworld – he served as the Director of the Dance Center at Harvard
from 1971 to 1977 and was instrumental in the formation of the Harvard Summer School Dance
Program – one could construct a narrative that highlights his non- philosophical preoccupations
with the creative work of his d ance- a rt contemporaries, including icons such as Merce Cunningham
who was also exploring the intersection of dance and video technology at the time. Alternatively,
one might reach back a bit further and emphasize an artistic link between Goodman’s
symbolic aims and those of earlier modern choreographers who sought to transform dancers’ representational
capacities through the use of sculptured masks and costumes ( e.g., Mary Wigman’s
Hexentanz (1 914/1 926) or Alwin Nikolais’ Masks, Props, and Mobiles ( 1953)) as well as projected
images ( e.g., Loïe Fuller’s developments of the original Serpentine Dance ( 1892)). Which narrative
is most accurate or illustrative is a matter for dance historians to decide; however, several plausible
artistic stories could be told that bind Hockey Seen to both antecedent and contemporaneous
dance-a rt projects. Thus, there is a theoretical basis for countenancing it as a work of dance art, as
well as a practical reason to believe that members of the 2 1st- century dance community might do
so if, as Lopes would advise, the “ buck were passed” to them.
With respect to the Classification Concern, Walton’s well- k nown theses in “C ategories”–
s uitably expanded to include a rt-c ategory m embership – pave the way for a response. He argues
that the generative artist’s intentions about correct category perception might be informative but
are not decisive, as they are one factor to consider against others: ( 1) whether the work has a preponderance
of features standard with respect to a given category; ( 2) whether the work is “ better,
or more interesting or pleasing aesthetically, or more worth experiencing when perceived” in a
given category; and ( 3) whether the relevant category “i s well established in and recognized by
the society in which W [the work] was produced” (W alton, 2008; 531). Goodman’s intentions
can, thus, be sidelined because Hockey Seen appears to satisfy the last three conditions with respect
to dance-art categories.
First, Hockey Seen has an abundance of properties standard for the categories “ work of dance
art,” “ work of modern dance art,” and “ work of experimental dance art.” These include things
Renee
M. Conroy
282
like: being a presentation in which human movement is the obvious appreciative focus, being a
presentation in which artistic content depends on the movements of people who are dancing,
and being a presentation in which kinetic features are determined by how people dance. The fact
that its symbolic content is enhanced by projected paintings and other images endows it with a
property that dance practice confirms is variable for all the aforementioned categories, which is
part of what I have suggested makes theater dance a complex, rather than straightforwardly hybrid,
artform. Thus, the only c ontra- standard properties Hockey Seen might possess, which are historical
rather than perceptible and do not seem to have much disqualifying weight, are that Goodman
was not a recognized dance artist and he did not call the work “ a dance.”
Second, although difficult to validate without mounting a reconstruction, it is credible that
Hockey Seen is more interesting, aesthetically pleasing, or worth experiencing when perceived as
being related to the array of d ance- a rt creations cultivated by the first wave of postmodernism in
American d ance – or as artistically linked to earlier experiments by modern dance pioneers – than
it would be if perceived in some nondescript categorical c atch- all bucket designed for wrangling
potential free agents, such as “ multimedia performance” or “ theatrical collaboration.” If experienced
in a dance-art category, its associations are, to borrow from Borges, “ almost infinitely richer.”
For one thing, the set of relevant artistic projects with which to make perceptual connections is
vastly clearer. For another, all the members of this set will draw attention to the uncontested appreciative
foci of Goodman’s artwork: the movements of actual dancers, of fictive sports players, and of
humans in action making meaningful connections between manufactured worlds.
Third, the three dance- related art categories noted above were all well- established in m id-
20th-century America when Hockey Seen premiered, as were many others that might be more
intriguing ( e.g., the s ub- c ategory of sports dances). Whatever Goodman might have intended, a
suitable appeal to Waltonian basics can defuse the Classification Concern. This leaves us with the
Choreographic Concern and the following question: can n on- dancers who are also not choreographers
author works of dance art?
Complete treatment of this issue is beyond the scope of this essay, but several points deserve
mention. First, although it might be tempting to regard it as c ontra- standard relative to d ance- art
categories for a dancework to have the historical property of being credited to someone who did
not choreograph it, this feature is actually variable if one considers both classical ballet practices
and the projects of some current dancemakers. In older ballet traditions, the choreographer was a
menial w orker- for- hire paid to design spectacles to showcase the idiosyncratic talents of star ballerinas;
thus, choreography was expected to change from cast to cast. As a result, the person who
typically receives creative credit for authoring works from 1 9th- c entury romantic and classical
dance- a rt traditions is the original scenarist or librettist, which is precisely what Goodman was in
the case of Hockey Seen.
Second, this historical practice has colored the danceworld’s perspective on Serge Diaghilev’s
Ballets Russes to some degree, so that while the infamous impresario never created a movement
sequence and rarely authored scenarios, he is frequently credited artistically ( not just causally) for
the existence of the ground- b reaking danceworks his company performed. It is worth noting that
Goodman’s relationship to Hockey Seen was much more authorially robust than Diaghilev’s was
to the works he produced. However, the cases are not dissimilar insofar as both men labored to
convene the most talented group of available visual artists, musicians, and choreographers to bring
their artistic visions to life on stage, and both oversaw their productions with a heavy directorial
hand.
Finally, in contemporary dance the “ rise of the choreographer- a uteur” that took place in the
early 20th century, and has become entrenched in d ance- art practice, is both highlighted and
problematized by works such as Jérôme Bel’s Xavier Le Roy ( 2000), whose official description on
Bel’s website reads as follows:
Dance
283
He [Bel] asked his colleague Xavier Le Roy to develop a choreography in his vein and with
his dancers, which he then signed, the way an artist signs a painting. The choreography is
called Xavier Le Roy — the name of the artist who has been appropriated, and who has carried
out another’s concept. But it is Jérôme Bel who claims authorship.
(http://www.xavierleroy.com/, accessed 2/14/20)
If Bel’s attempted appropriation is successful as an ironic commentary on dance- art history or
current dance practices, this is only because it is not an isolated case of someone being granted
authorial credit for a dancework ( s) he did not choreograph. Hence, there is danceworld precedent
for regarding dancework authors as numerically distinct from danceworld choreographers.
Philosophical defense of this practice awaits another occasion, but it must rely on drawing a
principled distinction between danceworks ( works created in the m ovement- c entered appreciative
practices that constitute dance qua artform) and choreographic works ( designed movement
structures). I defend this division elsewhere and describe it as follows: “ the dancework is what the
audiences are enjoined to appreciate, [while] the choreographic work is what the dances are instructed
to do to generate an artwork for audiences to enjoy” ( Conroy, 2019; 15). If this conceptual
line is maintained, then the creation of a dancework is a different authorial achievement from the
creation of a piece of choreography. As a result, it could be argued that Goodman authored Hockey
Seen in the sense that he was an author of the work, even if he might not have been its sole author
and Gray was its only choreographer. Thus, typical sources of skepticism about Hockey Seen’s potential
to be a work of dance art can be allayed.
4 Painting, Sculpture, and Dance Art: Lessons from Hockey Seen
Even if its dance- art status remains controversial, Hockey Seen enjoins philosophers of dance to reexamine
working assumptions about the nature of danceworks and implicit biases with respect to
the examples discussed in defense of our views. It also reminds us that the arts of dance trade frequently
in extensive collaboration between movement designers and visual artists. Stephen Davies
gestures at this when he recommends that, like opera, ballet should be regarded ontologically as
“ essentially hybrid in nature” ( Davies 2003; 177).
Davies’ brief treatment, however, emphasizes the exceptionally close relationship that often
exists between a ballet and its standard musical accompaniment, one in virtue of which the latter
might be regarded an essential feature of the former. One might object that Davies’ focus on ballet
is too narrow to do justice to the wide range of dance artworks, some of which are performed
without music, have no regimented costuming, and do not require any specialized props or stage
settings and, therefore, do not seem good candidates for hybrid ontological status. I prefer to describe
the arts of theater dance as complex, rather than essentially ( or even characteristically) hybrid,
to respect to the diversity of concert dance creations and the variety of ways works are regarded
by those with an active role in shaping danceworld practices.
But there is also reason to be concerned about the precedent set by Davies’ way of acknowledging
dance art’s potentially hybrid character. Although he focuses on ballet, which is a multimedia
tradition, he does not pursue the possibility that painting and sculpture might have as substantive
a metaphysical role to play in many balletic works as do musical scores. Hockey Seen cajoles us to
be more metaphysically conscientious since it reminds us that, like Goodman, dancemakers often
rely on exacting set designs and costuming to create the perceptual “ w ork- w orlds” within which
movement inventions unfold. It also exposes the danceworld commonplace that, in many cases,
the relationship between the choreographer and the visual artists ( if these are different people) is
genuinely artistically collaborative in the sense that commissioned sculptures and paintings do not
serve as mere “ perceptual frames” around antecedently designed movement. Instead, they often
Renee
M. Conroy
284
render selected movement structures physically possible and/ or actively limit the choreographer’s
range of options. Consistent with this recognition, Paisley Livingston offers the following characterization
of co- authorship in artistic contexts:
... if two or more persons jointly author an utterance or work, they must intentionally generate
or select the text, artefact, performance, or structure that is its publicly observable component; in
so doing, they act on meshing sub-plans and exercise shared control and decision-making authority
over the results
( Livingston, 2005; 83, emphasis mine)
Examples of creative collaboration between choreographers and visual artists satisfying Livingston’s
criteria abound, even though the choreographer is often given full artistic credit in public
notices. Consider Martha Graham’s long- t ime relationship with the sculptor, landscape architect,
and furniture designer Osamu Noguchi, who crafted interactive set pieces and narratively
indispensable props for her most revered works, including Night Journey ( 1947) and Cave of the
Heart ( 1946); Merce Cunningham’s use of backdrops and environmental props created by visual
art contemporaries Andy Warhol, Jasper Johns, and Robert Rauschenberg, which literally set
the stage for legendary creations such as Summerspace ( 1958) and Rainforest ( 1968); and Alonzo
King’s Triangle of the Squinches ( 2011), for which architect Christopher Haas designed two dramatic
w alls – one of shimmering elastic cords and another of hinged cardboard s lats – o n which
the dancing unfolds in vertical and horizontal planes. There is no shortage of danceworks with
respect to which central elements have been crafted meticulously by painters and sculptors to
complement, enhance, inhibit, or otherwise affect our perception of movement on stage through
processes that, when examined thoroughly, bear all the hallmarks of co- a uthorship as defined
by Livingston.
In addition, for a striking number of traditional dance- art creations, the choreography simply
cannot be performed correctly or in full without specialized visual art attendants. Mother Ginger
is unable to totter downstage to reveal an army of polichinelles in the second act of The Nutcracker
without assistance from an incredibly heavy stainless steel hoop skirt and hidden stilts, and Loïe
Fuller enthusiasts cannot pay homage to her famous images of flames and butterflies without
wearing her signature “ cape and stick” apparel ( an invention patented by Fuller in 1894). So,
too, it is impossible to dance Kurt Jooss’ classic The Green Table ( 1932), Tandy Beal’s Heisenberg’s
Principle ( 1982), or Llory Wilson’s Davenport Memoirs ( 1991) without the benefit of a special kind
of ball or a specifically shaped piece of parlor furniture that determines, in part, what a dancer is
able to do on stage. And many danceworks, including Alwin Nikolais’ Tensile Involvement (1955)
and Mats Ek’s Casi-Casa ( 2009), depend on radically interactive set pieces that both constrain
and amplify the performers’ movements. Some well- known dance companies, such as Chicago’s
Hedwig Dances, even dedicate themselves to pushing dance- visual art interpenetrations to both
practical and artistic limits. In cases like these, sculpture must be regarded as an essential feature
of the dance artwork. Additional examples can be marshaled to make a similar point about the
various roles painting plays in our perception of choreographed movement, especially with respect
to famous ballets whose backdrops were meticulously hand- c rafted by legends like Léon Baskt,
Pablo Picasso, and Henri Matisse.
To conclude: in an array of paradigmatic danceworld cases, the visual arts seem to have as
justifiable a claim to be work- constitutive as a musical score might. And independent of any philosopher’s
particular metaphysical commitments, it is uncontroversial that “ theatrical trappings”
make a substantive appreciative difference by contributing to – a nd effectively transforming – t he
representational, emotional, conceptual, and physical character of the movements executed in
dance-art performances. Hockey Seen reminds aestheticians of this important danceworld reality.
Dance
285
It also invites us to reconsider the philosophical habit of regarding music as a putative essential
component of many dance artworks while ignoring the roles played regularly by painting and
sculpture.
Furthermore, reflection on Goodman’s experiment draws attention to the fact that it is relatively
common for a finished dancework to be the product of a genuinely collaborative creative
process, wherein decisions made by n on- d ance artists, such as costumers and set designers, affect
the formal and aesthetic qualities of the completed d ance- a rt creation in ways that might render
these artisans worthy of authorial c o- credit in some cases. Such considerations suggest that, not
only is theater dance a metaphysically complex artform in the sense highlighted herein, its complex
relationships to painting and sculpture warrant further philosophical scrutiny.
Note
1 Theoretical expansion is required because Walton reminds readers in a recent symposium on “ Categories
of Art” that
What matters for Walton’70 is which categories works are correctly perceived in, not which ones
they belong to. A work might be perceived correctly in categories to which it does not belong, or
belong to categories it is not correctly perceived in.
( Walton, 2020: 80)
Bibliography
Carroll, N. ( 2008) ‘I dentifying Art,’ in Cahn, S. and Meskin, A. ( eds.) Aesthetics: A Comprehensive Anthology.
Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 445–454.
Carroll, N. ( 2019) ‘ Some Stabs at the Ontology of Dance,’ Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 44(1), pp. 70–80.
Carter, C. ( 2006) ‘H ockey Seen: Nelson Goodman,’ in Hockey Seen: A Nightmare in Three Periods and Sudden
Death A Tribute to Nelson Goodman. Haggerty Museum of Art Exhibition Guide. Wisconsin: Marquette
University. https://epublications.marquette.edu/haggerty_catalogs/6
Carter, C. ( 2009) ‘ Nelson Goodman’s Hockey Seen: A Philosopher’s Approach to Performance,’ in Erzen,
J. (ed.) Congress Book 2: Selected Papers: XVIIth International Congress of Aesthetics. SANART, pp. 57–67.
Conroy, R. (2 013) ‘T he Beat Goes On: Reconsidering Dancework Identity,’ in Bunker, J., Pakes, A., and
Rowell, B (e ds.) Thinking Through Dance: The Philosophy of Dance Performance and Practices. Hampshire:
Dance Books Ltd., pp. 102-126.
Conroy, R. ( 2019) ‘ Dances, Danceworks, and Choreographic Works: A Plea for Conceptual Clarity,’ Midwest
Studies in Philosophy, 44(1), pp. 7–20.
Davies, S. (2 003) ‘O ntology of Art,’ in Levinson, J. (e d.) The Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 155–180.
Goodman, N. ( 1983) ‘ A fterward – An Illustration,’ in Copeland, R. and Cohen, M. ( eds.) What Is Dance?
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 80–82.
Jerome Bel Website for information on Xavier Le Roy: http://www.xavierleroy.com/page.php?sp=54e59ecc
36602be4e50bbc961458fc724e63011a&lg=en
Livingston, P. ( 2005) Art and Intention: A Philosophical Study. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lopes, D. ( 2014) Beyond Art. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McFee, G. ( 2011) The Philosophical Aesthetics of Dance: Identity, Performance and Understanding. Hampshire:
Dance Books Ltd.
McFee, G. (2 018) Dance and the Philosophy of Action: A Framework for the Aesthetics of Dance. Hampshire: Dance
Books Ltd.
Pakes, A. ( 2020) Choreography Invisible: The Disappearing Work of Dance. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Camp, J. ( 2006) ‘ A Pragmatic Approach to the Identity of Works of Art,’ Journal of Speculative Philosophy,
20(1), pp.42–55.
Van Camp, J. ( 2019) ‘ Identity in Dance: What Happened?,’ Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 44(1), pp. 81–92.
Walton, K. (2 008) ‘C ategories of Art,’ in Cahn, S. and Meskin, A. (e ds.) Aesthetics: A Comprehensive Anthology.
Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 521–537.
Walton, K. ( 2020) ‘ Aesthetic Properties: Context Dependent and Perceptual’, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism, 78(1), pp. 79–84.
PART
VIQuestions of Value

DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-36 289
29RELIGIONGordon Graham
There is an ancient and enduring connection between religion and all the a rts – i n music, archi-tecture and poetry no less than painting and sculpture. The expression ‘ religious art’, however, is generally taken to refer to the visual and plastic arts and brings to mind such famous works as Leonardo’s Last Supper, Michelangelo’s Pieta, Caravaggio’s Beheading of John the Baptist and Holman Hunt’s Light of the World. All these works have Christian subjects and are at the same time mani-festations of the best European visual art across several centuries. Furthermore, along with a great many others, they owe their existence to Church patronage.
Other world religions have also produced great art. Hinduism, for instance, has generated a profusion of illustration, ornament and statuary. In sharp contrast, Judaism and Islam are noted for a reservation about representational art that springs from the fear of idolatry. The second of the Ten Commandments given to Moses on Mount Sinai says ‘ You must not make a carved image for yourself, nor the likeness of anything’ (Exodus 20:4), while Islam’s hadith ( a record of properly authenticated stories about the life of the Prophet) recounts an episode clearly suggesting Muham-mad’s firm belief that representative art is sacrilegious.
A tension between those who favour visual art and those who are suspicious of it can be found within the same religion. In the Protestant Reformation, many Christians rejected representative visual art for the same reasons as Judaism. Even Eastern Orthodoxy, a variety of Christianity nota-ble for beautiful icons, generated intense theological debate between ‘ iconoclasts’ and ‘ iconodules’ in the 8th and 9th centuries, and one council held in 754 explicitly denounced ‘ the evil art of painters’. One view of the relationship between religion and the visual arts, then, finds a deep af-finity between them, while another sees an equally deep incompatibility. One aim of this chapter is to show why such a difference of opinion arises.
1 Representation and Resemblance
Painters and sculptors, it is natural to think, use a variety of media to depict objects, people and places by means of lifelike appearance. Yet a little reflection quickly reveals that representation need not rely on resemblance. A few convex and concave lines can successfully represent a smiling or a frowning face, without resembling a real human being, and while we have no difficulty iden-tifying Mickey Mouse as a mouse, no one would mistake him for a real one.
Second, some visual depiction does seek to resemble the thing depicted as closely as possible, but when this is the case, the purpose need not be artistic. Identikit pictures based on the observa-tions of witnesses are an example. Even in cases where skill at drawing and coloration is needed,
Gordon
Graham
290
and the result is a beautiful picture, the aim may not be artistic. While guidebook illustrations
of birds and plants are often beautiful in their own right, their purpose is a practical one, namely
enabling us to identify the species to which real birds belong.
Third, the most striking example of representation by means of close resemblance is trompe
l’oeil – t wo- dimensional depiction that is so close in appearance to the original, it deceives us into
thinking the object depicted is actually present. Though trompe l’oeil requires an exceptional mastery
of perspective, foreshortening and the use of colour, light and shade, it more often results in a
curiosity than an artistic masterpiece. True masterpieces show the same exceptional command of
artistic techniques, but to a different end. Vincent van Gogh’s ‘ Irises’, for example, is an outstanding
figurative painting but is not going to be mistaken for a bed of flowers.
Fourth, the existence of non-figurative art is a further counter to the idea that representation requires
resemblance. Abstract visual art can be representational, and some of the clearest examples
are found in religious art. The mandalas characteristics of the religions of India, for example, are
both abstract geometrical designs and symbolic representations of the cosmos. Similarly, ignorance
of what the cross on which Jesus was crucified looked like has been no obstacle to its being visually
represented. The Jerusalem cross, the Celtic cross and the Orthodox cross all serve this purpose,
though none can claim to resemble the original.
A fifth important consideration is this. Visual art that neither resembles nor represents can
play a prominent role in the decoration and ornamentation of churches and temples – as well as
in synagogues and mosques where figurative art is forbidden. Despite, or perhaps because of this
restriction, Islamic art especially has taken geometrical design to great heights. Astonishingly
complex patterns in tiling, plasterwork and carving evidently serve effectively as artistic pointers
to the Infinite in time and space, without resembling or representing anything.
We should conclude that while it is natural to suppose that the meaning and value of visual art
lies in its ability to resemble and represent, this is a mistake. Representation by means of resemblance
is a significant artistic accomplishment, but the representation of a thing need not resemble
that thing, and neither representation nor resemblance can serve as a measure of artistic excellence.
What matters is the purpose of representation. Lifelike pictures and photographs are useful for
identification and record, but representative pictures can serve other purposes besides these. Once
we acknowledge that visual art can serve different purposes, we can see that artistic purposes can
be served by non- representational art as well. In short, resemblance and representation are just
some of the means available to visual artists.
If resemblance and representation are means, what are the ends to which they can most powerfully
be directed? Aestheticians have tended to insist on the creation of the visually beautiful
for its own sake, but clearly the visual arts often have other e nds – e ntertainment, advertising,
education, campaigning, for example. We can add religious purposes to the list, and this gives us
a helpful conceptual framework within which to explore the relationship between the visual arts
and religion.
2 Visual Art and Religious Life
How are the purposes of the religious life best characterized? This is a difficult question. Answering
it satisfactorily cannot ignore issues over which religious believers have frequently disagreed,
sometimes passionately. Just as it is commonly supposed that resemblance is essential to visual
art, so there is a common supposition that belief in the supernatural lies at the heart of religion.
Religion, this assumption implies, is humanity’s response to a reality beyond or behind the world
we ordinarily perceive, the world that natural science investigates. The spiritual world, however,
is super- natural; it has to be specially revealed to us. In confirmation of this supposition, Judaism,
Christianity and Islam all regard their sacred writings – t he Hebrew Scriptures, the Christian Bible
Religion
291
and the Q uran – a s ‘ revelation’ of a divine reality. The religions of the E ast – H induism, Buddhism
and S ikhism – also have their holy w ritings – t he Upanishads, Buddhavacana and Adi Granth.
It is important to observe that in none of these cases was the religion in question founded on its
holy book. The Christian Gospels were composed decades after the events they recount, and only
became ‘ canonical’ centuries later, while the Quran consists in God’s revelations to Muhammad
over a 2 2- year period, collated and given unalterable authority only after Muhammad’s death,
when Islam was already firmly established. So too the Sikh holy book assumed the status of revelation
only when it took the place of the tenth guru of the Sikh religion.
The significance of all these holy books, consequently, is a function of the role they have come
to play within a distinctive cultic practice. Their claims ( and suppositions) about supernatural reality
rely on a vocabulary and set of concepts whose meaning has arisen within this practice. Taken
out of that context, they are merely ancient texts. This means that religious practice has to be regarded
as more foundational than religious belief. So, contrary to the supposition with which we
began, the heart of a religion is to be found in its rituals, ceremonies and ethical principles rather
than its creeds and catechisms.
Of course, participation in religious practice can be purely conventional, and its ceremonies
become mere rituals. So too, theological doctrines can become purely abstract formulae. Given
these possibilities for a ‘ dead’ religion, many thinkers stress the importance of a third element –
religious feeling – e xperience of the supernatural or the divine, rather than subscription to doctrines
or participation in practices. This three- f old classification ( traditionally referred to in a
different order as ‘ intellect, emotion and will’) reflects the fact that all religions have their distinctive
practices, virtually all have teachings about the supernatural, and every religion makes some
appeal to validation through personal experience. It thus provides a useful way of thinking about
the different ways in which visual art might serve religious ends.
Initially, visual art does not appear to relate very well to any of the three. Literary art seems
the most promising medium for the articulation of religious belief and doctrine, music and drama
( especially in combination with the art of architecture) lie at the heart of ritualistic practice, while
music, dance and poetry are the obvious contenders for the expression of personal experience. So
what role could paintings or statues play? Actually, visual art can play a role in all three. Visual
narrative serves religious belief, visual identity serves ritualistic practice, and visual expression
serves the life of the spirit.
3 Visual Narrative and Religious Belief
The most obvious and accessible religious beliefs take the form of s tories – stories of divine
visitations, miraculous happenings, conversion experiences, historical events. The Jewish religion
is best summarized, in fact, as the story of God’s dealings with the Israelites, including, for
instance, the journey through the Wilderness to the Promised Land, the Exile to Babylon and
return to Jerusalem. For Christians, this same story culminates in the birth, ministry, miracles,
Crucifixion and Resurrection of Jesus. The Quran is unusual in being a holy book without stories,
but Muslims attribute great significance to episodes in the life of the Prophet recorded in
the hadith. So too, the story of Buddha under the Bo tree is the pivotal event of Buddhism, while
the Hindu scriptures are replete with stories of Hindu gods and goddesses. Beyond the pages of
their sacred books, religions generate other important events and c haracters – the bodhisattvas of
Mahayana Buddhism, the martyrs and missionaries of Christianity, the Hejira of Islam and the
Jewish ‘ Mourning for Jerusalem’, for instance.
Stories can be told in pictures as well as words. That is how religious belief and visual art so
easily form a relationship. Though the Bible is a literary text without any original illustrations,
its stories and characters have proved a major stimulus to visual artists and their patrons. Indeed,
Gordon
Graham
292
probably the single largest category of religious visual art is of this kind, and it is ancient. Early Christian paintings are to be found in the Catacombs of Rome, depicting figures and events from the Bible. The Ajanta Caves in the Indian state of Maharashtra are even older and are decorated with paintings of the Buddha, as well as episodes from his previous lives. South Indian classical painting in the Mysore tradition is mostly scenes from Hindu mythology.
These examples show visual art being used to teach and propagate religious beliefs, but some of the most strikingly beautiful religious art is to be found illustrating sacred texts. In these cases, visual art is not a non- l iterary alternative to text, but an enhancement of it. What lends visual art the power to enhance sacred text?
Importantly, painters ( and sculptors) can determine just how the things they choose to depict are to be seen. At a strictly material level, a painting is nothing more than coloured pigments spread in patches on a flat surface. The ‘ art’ of the painter, then, lies in getting the viewer to see beyond this material level, and perceive things in the painting. The most obvious way to do this is ‘ representation’. We see, say, a face, a flower or a hillside in the picture, because the painter has chosen to put them there. What we see owes its perceptual existence to the use of composition, perspective, colour and so on. These are techniques by which the viewer is obliged to move from the observation of pigment on a flat surface to the apprehension of perceptual objects. And if, as with abstract and ‘ action’ painting, there are only patches of colour and geometrical patterns to be seen, that too is the work of the artist.
Thus, religious painters and sculptors compel us to apprehend the actions, occurrences and characters central to a religion a certain way. Where there are no visual records ( and often could be no such records), it is thanks to the visual artist that believers and potential believers can visualize the people and events of their faith. And by directing our attention, religious visual art becomes a means of spiritual orientation.
To see this, consider the development of Christian painting from the Renaissance to Baroque ( roughly 1 450– 1 650 CE). From early to late Renaissance, painters, especially in Italy, depicted biblical scenes and Christian saints in a ‘ heavenly’ rather than an ‘ earthly’ style. They present the faithful with idealized images in which, for instance, saints have halos ( brightly coloured circles that surround the head), or an unnaturally calm, untroubled posture under conditions of great physical pain. These visual markers make the person on whose ‘ holiness’ the artist invites us to fo-cus stand out. Thus, in ‘ The Stoning of Stephen’ by Paolo Ucello ( c. 1397– 1475), St Stephen’s head is surrounded by a halo, and his eyes are cast heavenward as he kneels unperturbed in the midst of an angry mob hurling stones down on top of him. His f aith- fi lled response contrasts dramatically with any ordinary victim, who would be cringing fearfully, fruitlessly guarding face and body against such painful blows.
The same ‘ heavenly’ kind of image is to be found in a painting of the Martyrdom of Saint Sebas-tian by Carlo Crivelli ( 1 430– 1 494). Though strapped to a tree, and shot through with no fewer than 24 arrows, the saint stands calmly looking up to heaven with a silver halo behind/ on top of his head. The message is plain. Here is someone who has become truly indifferent to material mis-fortune, thanks to the infusion of heavenly grace. We need not suppose that Ucello nor Crivelli thought they were recording the actual attitude of Stephen or Sebastian in the face of martyrdom, any more than they thought that saintly people generally go about with halos. The point, rather, is to give striking visual representation to a contrast between the holiness of the saints and the brutality of unredeemed humanity.
‘ Mannerist’ paintings of this kind contrast sharply with the new realism of the early Baroque, exemplified by the Italian painter Caravaggio ( 1571– 1610), some of whose works can still be found in the sanctuaries for which they were originally commissioned. They are highly realistic in their depiction of saints and biblical scenes, showing the Apostles for example, with dirty feet and heav-ily wrinkled faces. Those who were accustomed to idealized portraits of the saints objected, but
Religion
293
the devotional relevance of these pictures is inspirational rather than aspirational. That is to say,
the Mannerists portrayed an unearthly spirituality to which the believer is encouraged to aspire;
Caravaggio shows saints to be possessed of humanity with which the worshipper is able to identify,
enabling the worshipper to glimpse a spiritual dimension within, rather than beyond, the world
of ordinary experience.
To summarize: All religions tell stories related to their sacred books and their history. In supplying
visual narratives of these stories, the artist goes beyond illustration. By means of visual
imagination, the mind of the worshipper is led to engage with religious narratives and characters,
to understand them better and appreciate them more deeply.
4 Visual Expression and Religious Emotion
The idea that art has a role to play in religious ‘ instruction’ was a commonplace in the 17th and
18th centuries. The 19th century, however, saw the rise of Romanticism with its emphasis on
feeling. Accordingly, the most obvious connection between art and religion was thought to be
emotional. On this way of thinking, visual art is an essentially expressive medium and the ultimate
purpose of painting is the expression and communication of religious emotion.
In the history of art, ‘ Expressionism’ names a distinctive school of painting that arose, partly,
in reaction to the more widely celebrated school known as ‘ Impressionism’. The Expressionist response
to Impressionism rested on a preference for emotional impact over perceptual experience.
The difference is strikingly embodied in the life and work of Paul Gauguin ( 1848– 1903). Gauguin
was a gifted amateur painter and completed some pictures in the Impressionist style. When none
of them was chosen for an impressionist exhibition in 1886, he turned in other directions and
adopted a much bolder use of colour. His first major painting in this new style had a religious
theme – Vision after the Sermon: Jacob Wrestling with the Angel ( 1888), the first of a series of religious
paintings of which The Yellow Christ ( 1889) is the best known. Gauguin’s great contemporary,
Vincent van Gogh, was even more explicit in his subscription to expressionism. ‘ I have tried to
express with red and green’ he wrote ‘ the terrible passions of human nature’.
But can emotion be visually depicted? Emotion is not a visual phenomenon, but this does not
constitute the restriction that it might seem to. There can be visual representations of the n onvisual.
Thanks to what philosophers sometimes call ‘ natural signs’ a strictly visual medium can
successfully be used to depict something non- visual. For instance, shapes and colours are perceptual
phenomena; sadness and happiness are not. Yet, as simple drawings of a ‘ happy face’ or a
‘ sad face’ demonstrate, emotion can be visually depicted. The widespread use of ‘ emojis’ to add
emotional nuance to text messages shows just how easy this is. The meaning of a yellow smiley
face or a stylized red heart can be grasped intuitively.
Great art can do the same. Edvard Munch’s The Scream ( 1895) uses black lines on a white background
to create an easily identifiable picture of depression, while his paintings of Despair and
Anxiety illustrate the natural emotional associations of certain colours. The word ‘ blue’ can describe
both a colour and a mood, ‘ seeing red’ relates to anger, just as yellow does to cowardice. Van
Gogh’s paintings are renowned for the surprising way in which the strong colours he uses seem
to infuse flowers, landscapes and furnished rooms with emotional overtones. And there is reason
to think that even when the figure is abstracted, the emotional resonance can remain. ‘ Abstract
Expressionism’ originally referred to a particular group of New York artists but came to mean a
style of painting that abandons the figurative for reliance on the emotional content of colour alone.
The paintings of Mark Rothko ( 1903– 1970), identified by numbers rather than titles, aim to let
colour to speak for itself.
Paintings inspired by abstract expressionism are not always successful, but there is nothing
absurd about the attempt to depict emotion n on- fi guratively, and some painters have sought to
Gordon
Graham
294
exploit this possibility for religious purposes. Wassily Kandinsky is one. In addition to his paint-ings, Kandinsky published a short book entitled Concerning the Spiritual in Art. In a section headed ‘ the language of form and colour’, he tells us that the starting point for a properly artistic spirit is ‘ the study of colour and its effects on men’. There are feelings so fine grained, he says, that words can at best gesture towards them, and this observation grounds his belief in the spiritual power of painting.
Is this ‘ spiritual’ in a religious sense? The emotions of joy, grief, exhilaration and anxiety all figure in religious life, but they figure in n on- religious life also. So what emotions, if any, should we identify as distinctively religious? There are three plausible contenders. The first is awe gener-ated by a sense of the vastness of time and space. The second is existential anxiety, prompted by an awareness of contingency and mortality. The third is guilt and sin as we compare our lives with ideals of beauty, integrity and moral excellence. For simplicity’s sake, we can label these emotions ‘ wonder’, ‘ fear’ and ‘ sinfulness’. Can wonder, fear and sinfulness be given purely visual expression?
In a very wide range of cases, the proper identification of an emotion depends upon the object to which it is directed. For instance, a feeling of depression accompanies grief, loneliness and disappointment, while a feeling of elation accompanies pleasure, joy and excitement. So what turns the same feeling into a different emotion? The answer is the state of affairs that is both its originating cause and its intentional object. Grief is a feeling that is both caused by and directed at loss; excitement is a feeling caused by and directed at success.
Emotions, in other words, are constituted by apprehension as well as feeling. Without the el-ement of apprehension, feeling is largely indeterminate. When feelings have proper objects, they become intelligible emotions. To be correctly described as jealousy, for example, a feeling of un-easiness must be caused by someone else’s success and directed at that person.
It follows that for experienced ‘ feeling’ is to be identified as a specific religious emotion of wonder, fear or sinfulness, we have to be able to identify an object at which the feeling is properly directed. This enables us to restate the question. Visual art is undoubtedly able to stimulate feel-ing. But can it direct that feeling in a way that justifies our identifying the feeling as a religious emotion?
It was noted earlier that figurative painting ( including symbolic representation) can direct the mind. If now we add that shapes and colours have the power to express and convey emotion, we can see how, in combination, visual art is able to serve the expression and communication of re-ligious emotion. The use of form and colour, as the expressionists claimed, can stimulate feeling. Figuration directs this feeling to an identifiably religious object. It does not matter whether the figuration is realistic, surreal or symbolic. Any of these can enable the mind to identify and direct the accompanying feeling.
By way of illustration, compare Francisco de Zurbaran’s painting Agnus Dei, with Paul Klee’s The Lamb. The former, painted in several versions between 1635 and 1640, is a highly lifelike painting of a young sheep tied by the legs and ( the picture invites us to assume) awaiting slaughter. The colours in de Zurbaran’s picture are muted – b rowns and blacks mostly – s o a negative feeling of pity is prompted almost entirely by representational resemblance. This feeling is then directed to a properly religious object by entitling it Angus Dei, the name given to Jesus Christ in the Bible. In this way, the picture converts a feeling of pity into a devotional attitude. By contrast, Klee’s pic-ture, painted in 1920, is not at all lifelike. Its lamb is almost a cartoon, with very vibrant colours. The heightened feeling the picture invokes, to which we cannot easily give a name, is directed to the same religious object as de Zurbaran’s, however, not in this case by a generic title ‘ Lamb’, but by pictorial content, namely a cross, positioned like a spike through the head of the lamb with blood dripping from it. Both pictures evoke and direct feeling that is identifiable as religious emo-tion because the pictures, in different ways, direct it towards the sacrifice of Christ. That is what makes them emotionally powerful from a religious point of view. Without its identifying title, we
Religion
295
might well find de Zurbaran’s picture disturbing, but the emotion would be pity for the sufferings
of an animal. So too, relying only on the title of Klee’ s – T he Lamb – we have no reason to think
of the Lamb of God. Without these i dentifiers – t he one linguistic, the other figurative, we have
no reason to regard the pictures as religious art.
Some thinkers suppose that the religious or spiritual content of abstract expressionism can
be experienced without any specifically religious identifiers. The theologian David Brown, for
instance, says that the paintings of Kandinsky and Klee show a ‘ pre- occupation with form and
colour as means of highlighting the underlying divine reality of the world’, while in Rothko’s
‘ implicitly religious canvases one senses a tragic longing for transcendence’ ( Brown 2004, 1 36–
137). But can we make these connections with sufficient confidence? Klee’s expressionist Lamb
functions in the same way as Zurbaran’s Angus Dei because for all its obvious differences, it is no
less explicitly religious. The cross and the blood provide the elements needed for the feeling to be
properly directed. Without such pointers, determining the mark of the implicitly religious feeling
would be problematic, since we could not tell how it differs from non-religious feeling.
The Rothko Chapel in Houston Texas supplies an illustration of this point. Commissioned
from Rothko, the Chapel was completed a year or so after his suicide in accordance with his
conception of how it should be, and contains 14 of his paintings. They are all large colour field
works in very dark hues, the kind of painting that became his trademark. It would be possible
to visit the Rothko Chapel with complete indifference, but most visitors, it seems plausible to
suppose, can be expected to feel something. The feelings they experience, however, could be
of many different kinds – awe, admiration and pleasure, no doubt, but also, perhaps, contempt,
irritation or puzzlement. By calling the building a ‘ chapel’, it is implied that some of these
‘ feelings’ are more appropriate than o thers – p leasure rather than contempt, for i nstance – a nd
that in addition to simple pleasure, at least some people will experience feelings properly called
‘ religious’. Accordingly, the Rothko Chapel guide book describes the building as ‘ a holy place
open to all religions’, though it adds, ‘ and belonging to none’, thereby immediately raising this
question. If the ‘ chapel’ belongs to no religion, what reason is there to think that the feelings the
paintings in it arouse are religious? Rothko himself declared at one point that he was interested
only ‘ in expressing basic human e motions— tragedy, ecstasy, doom, and so on’. These words
sometimes have religious overtones, and we might grant that the emotions Rothko names are at
least q uasi- religious. Nevertheless, why are these terms the appropriate ones? Why say that a large
patch of brilliant colour expresses emotional ‘ ecstasy’, rather than describing it more simply as
visually exciting? What makes a large patch of dark colour expressive of ‘ doom’, rather than an
undifferentiated depression? Colour alone does not compel us to connect it, as Brown does, with
‘ a tragic longing for transcendence’?
The idea of pure, t hought- free feeling has had a special allure for visual artists in the modern
period and many impressive paintings and sculptures have been the result. The cost of abstraction,
however, is a loss of specificity and hence of meaning. Sorrow, guilt, depression, anxiety are all
merged into uneasiness, while inspiration, surprise and joy are all merged into delight. The intelligible
differentiation of psychic feeling requires identifying markers. Consequently, for works
of visual art to be expressions of religious emotion, they must incorporate recognizable signs of
properly religious objects. In other words, visual expression without visual identity remains religiously
indeterminate.
5 Visual Art and Religious Identity
Painting does not always preserve or communicate identity. Indeed, one way of characterizing
abstract painting is to see it as a deliberate, s elf- c onscious determination to avoid all forms of
identification. The American artist Jackson Pollock ( 1 912– 1 956) became famous for his ‘ action’
Gordon
Graham
296
paintings
– pictures created by pouring and splashing colour on large canvases. His ‘ method’ emphasized speed and spontaneity so that no preconceived idea, even on the part of the painter, would be allowed to influence the outcome. If we ‘ see’ anything in Pollock’s action paintings, it is a consequence of the arbitrary imposition or association of images on the part of the viewer. As his paintings became more abstract, Pollock abandoned titles as well as figuration, and like Roth-ko’s, they are labelled ‘ untitled’ or just given a number. This is a notable feature of other abstract expressionists. Mondrian, as he moved away from the figurative, produced ‘ compositions’, and Kandinsky produced numbered ‘ improvisations’.
Does
abstraction of this kind make religious painting impossible? According to the great art historian E H Gombrich,
Kandinsky,
Klee and Mondrian were mystics who wanted to break through the veil of appearances to a higher truth.... It is part of the doctrine of Zen... that no one who has not been shocked out of his rational habits of thought can become enlightened.
Gombrich 1995 ( 16th edition) p. 604)
Perhaps
Gombrich is right to see a desire for mystical experience in the aims of abstract expressionism. If the arguments of the previous section are correct, however, this ‘ experience’ is of too indeterminate a kind to be properly religious. It could not in fact sustain the religious distinction between ‘ veil of appearances’ and ‘ higher truth’. On the contrary, regardless of what the artists themselves may have thought, such paintings are most plausibly regarded as the presentation of nothing but appearance. We may, of course, continue to admire them, but our admiration need only be grounded in their ability to reveal the astonishing beauty and wonder of the visual in itself. Abstract painting does not take us beyond the veil of appearance; it gives us occasion to delight in it.
The
striking difference of style that sets off ‘ modern’ art from its ‘ realist’ precursors transcends the figurative/ n on- fi gurative division. ‘ Modern’ art includes both. De Zurbaran’s Agnus Dei is ‘ realist’; Paul Klee’s The Lamb is ‘ modern’. Though painted in radically different styles, they are both figurative. In this case, ‘ modernism’ is continuous with the art of earlier centuries. The same point can be made about paintings of the Crucifixion. There are hundreds, probably thousands of renderings of this scene by notable painters and sculptors. Antonello de Messina ( c. 1430– 1 479) painted several versions in the m id- 15th century, and 500 years later, Marc Chagall ( 1887– 1985) did just the same. No one could fail to see the radical visual differences between them, yet even without its title, Chagall’s White Crucifixion of 1938 clearly has the same subject as Messina’s Crucifixion of 1455.
In
other cases, however, the question of continuity is problematic. ‘ The Annunciation’ is the traditional name for the occasion recorded in Luke’s Gospel when a very youthful Mary is visited by an angel who tells her that she will become pregnant by the Holy Spirit. The scene of their encounter has been painted by acclaimed artists in every century from the 13th to the 19th. The list includes Giotto (1267–1337), Botticelli (1445–1510), Leonardo (1452–1519), Titian (1485–1576), El Greco (1541–1614), Caravaggio (1571–1610), Rubens (1577–1640), Murillo (1617–82), Goya (1746–1828), Rossetti (1828–1882) and Tissot (1856–1902). This impressively long list captures a history of both continuity and c hange – c ontinuity of subject and change of style. Though painting styles have altered greatly, in every century from Giotto to Tissot, it is easy to identify the same scene.
But
three more modernistic paintings, apparently with this same theme, raise a question: At what point does change of style about change of subject? Annunciation by the Cubist Fernand Leger ( 1 881– 1 955) shows the face of a woman, to whom a dove seems to be murmuring. Is the dove intended to take the place of the angel? If so, how could we distinguish between substitution and
Religion
297
abandonment; a dove is not an angel. Annunciation by the surrealist Rene Magritte ( 1 898– 1 967)
is a figurative painting, but in the positions where we might expect to find Mary and the angel,
we find three motifs that turn up repeatedly in Magritte’s w ork – a curtain of iron with b ell-l ike
shapes, a piece of paper cut into patterns and two ‘ bilboquets’ ( to use Magritte’s term), i.e. silvery
white balusters. This picture displays Magritte’s remarkable facility for representational art, the
motifs mark it with his distinctive style, and his choice of title is deliberate. But what relationship
does it h ave – c ould it have? – w ith the scene from Luke’s Gospel? ‘ Annunciation. Study I’ by the
abstract expressionist Brice Marden ( b.1938) is an abstract – e ight black and white lines of varying
thickness on a white background. This seems even further removed from the Gospel narrative
than Magritte’s. In all three cases, the gap between the picture and Luke’s story is too great to
preserve any link at all.
Even if we say that what matters is the emotional response to the episode of the Annunciation
that these painters have embodied in their paintings, this will not be sufficient to make them religious
paintings. That is because the emotion to which the painter successfully gave expression
need not be religious. Perhaps Leger, Magritte or Marden were voicing contempt or loathing for
a story they regarded as a despicable idealization of submissiveness in women.
Even when images are more determinate, uncertainty can arise for a different reason. Immersion
(Piss Christ) is a work by the American photographer and artist Andres Serrano ( b. 1950). The
work is a red- t inged photograph of a crucifix submerged in a glass container of what the artist
claimed to be his own urine. The work won the 1987 Southeastern Center for Contemporary
Arts ‘ Awards in the Visual Arts’ competition, but precisely because the image is unmistakeably
Christian, it provoked an adverse reaction in many quarters. Serrano’s image, critics alleged, was
a deliberate denigration of Christ’s sacrificial death. Other commentators denied this and saw it in
an elevation of the mundane. It seems that Serrano’s rather beautiful photograph can be taken in
quite different ways, with the consequence that none of the several interpretations which circulated
at the time is any more defensible than any other.
Demands for the piece to be banned from public exhibitions, on the grounds of its offensiveness
to Christians, met with protests from those who wanted to protect artistic freedom from religious
censorship. This assertion of the importance of artistic freedom against d eep- s eated religious sensibilities
reveals a tension between visual art and religion different to those of Islam or the Mosaic
Law. To affirm the autonomy of art as a p ractice – e xpressed in the slogan ‘ art for art’s sake’ –
requires artistic independence on the part of the painter. Religious identity must not be allowed
to circumscribe art. On this view, if painting has any use for religious subjects it is only because
through them painters and sculptors choose to express their artistic individuality ( and spiritual
insights, perhaps). In times past, visual art was expected to serve religion. With the liberation of
art for art’s sake, such subservience is no longer acceptable.
The high- value modernity places on artistic integrity, and the related importance of individuality,
means that the visual markers of religious identity – s tories, events and characters from the
Bible and history of the Church – cannot be any more than materials. Like pigment, canvas, stone
and bronze, they are available to painters and sculptors to do with as they wish. From this perspective,
religious identity must give way to artistic creativity. The aim of visual art is not to educate
the faithful, but to win an audience of its own, inviting them, sometimes, to find in a work some
spiritual or other ‘ meaning’.
This trajectory – from authoritative religious depiction intended to inform and inspire, to
authentic artistic expression aiming to engender a ‘ felt’ response on the part of the viewer –
characterizes the development of religious visual art in the Christian West. The story of religion’s
relationship to visual art in Eastern Orthodoxy, in Islam, Hinduism and Buddhism is different.
But globally, it is Western art that dominates the gallery and museum, and for the most part this
has left any alliance with religion behind.
Gordon
Graham
298
Bibliography
Brown, David. ( 2004) God and Enchantment of Place, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Danto, Arthur C. ( 1981) The Transfiguration of the Commonplace, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Gombrich, E. H. ( 1995) The Story of Art 16th edition, London, Phaidon Press.
Graham, Gordon. ( 2017) Philosophy, Art and Religion: Understanding Faith and Creativity, Cambridge, Cam-bridge University Press.
Kandinsky, Wassily. ( 1977) Concerning the Spiritual in Art, New York, Dover Publications.
Rookmaker, H. R. ( 1994) Modern Art and the Death of a Culture, Wheaton Illinois, Crossway Books.
Wolterstorff, Nicholas. ( 1980, 1996) Art in Action: Towards a Christian Aesthetic, Grand Rapids, William B Eerdmans.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-37 299
30“ ART IS HOW WE LOVE OURSELVES NOW”Race, Fine Art, and the Dignity of Criticism
Paul C. Taylor
1 Introduction: Distraction and Entanglement
In an address originally delivered to the NAACP in 1926, W.E.B. Du Bois provocatively identi-fies the governing principle of the field that would come to be called critical race aesthetics. He begins by imagining two groups of his listeners reacting inappropriately to his decision to take art as his subject. One group laments this distracting detour from the pursuit of racial justice; the other group welcomes the opportunity to “ turn away,” however briefly, from life’s real struggles. Du Bois points out that both groups have the same guiding thought – that fine art and racial politics have nothing to do with each o ther – a nd that both groups are wrong. “ The thing we are talking about tonight,” he explains, “ is part of the great fight we are carrying on…” ( Du Bois, 1926; paragraph 3).
Du Bois goes on to explore several ways in which the production, evaluation, and apprecia-tion of art connect to the production, experience, and analysis of r ace – a nd, more importantly, to the prospects for navigating a racialized world intelligently and safely. He notes, among other things, that the experiences of racialized subjects can provide art with its most profound topics and themes, that racial codes and scripts often shape the distribution of opportunities for artis-tic training and aesthetic experience, and that art at its best can reset the problematic cognitive habits and expand the stunted imaginative capacities that enable white supremacy to persist and thrive.
As it happens, art and race are even more intimately related than this short sketch of Du Bois’ argument reveals. The most influential forms of both emerged at roughly the same time, in roughly the same contexts, under the pressure of many of the same forces. Each of these modern inventions helped shape the other, both at the level of concept and discourse and at the level of concrete practice. And this dialectical relationship continues in current approaches to race and art, in ways that make an appropriately critical approach to either require some sense of its impact and dependence on the other.
What follows will explore some of the many dimensions of what Monique Roelofs calls the “ entwinements” or “ entanglements” of art and race ( Roelofs, 2018; 377). The next two sections will offer some philosophical ground rules for thinking about race productively and track some of the inroads that critical race theory has made into the study of art and the aesthetic. The next two sections will tease out the inner logic of some of these entanglements using art world case studies.
( The case studies will focus primarily on the challenges that white supremacy and a nti- blackness raise for responsible inhabitants of various art worlds. This emphasis is in no way meant
Paul C. Taylor
300
to suggest that whiteness and blackness are the only racial positions worth scrutiny. As I’ve already
noted, race is a profoundly contextual affair, despite having some generalizable features. My aim is
to explore the racial dynamics I know best, the ones illuminated by black studies, black feminism,
and Africana philosophy, on the way to articulating general principles that will apply, mutatis mutandis,
in sites defined by alternative modes of racialization.)
2 Taking Race Seriously
Race is a notoriously slippery and controversial subject. There are different ways to think about
it, and these differences spark debates in various registers. Nevertheless, the approaches currently
regarded as most promising tend to share a handful of basic features.
As in any vibrant s ub- fi eld of philosophy, race theorists stake out opposed positions in a variety
of domains. Some think the vernacular conception of race ( if there is just one) is indefensible,
while some think it’s salvageable. Some are interested in race as a political tool that states use
to contain unruly populations, while others regard it as a conceptual tool for capturing the way
human social practices have created porous but identifiable breeding populations. Some attach a
great deal of importance to the fact that r ace- thinking works differently in different places, while
others are content to focus primarily on the c olor- c oded US- s tyle approach. Finally, some think
race talk does more harm than good and should be abolished, while others think some refined,
critical forms of it do useful a nti- racist work.
These differences aside, contemporary race theories tend to share six basic commitments.
1 Take race seriously, which means accepting that it is important to examine the practices and
populations that words like “ race” denote. There are different ideas about how the practices
work and what the populations are and how to use the words properly, but the shared starting
point typically involves attending to the vernacular practices of r ace- thinking in places like
the United States. In these places, it is common to sort humans into five or so color- coded
populations ( brown, black, red, white, and yellow), and to think of these populations as interestingly
( if not always directly) descended from the premodern inhabitants of the world’s
major land masses.
The remaining commitments explain how to take race seriously. The key is to approach it in the
following ways:
2 As a subject of criticism, which means contesting the mechanisms of racial oppression and injustice
and questioning the racial discourses that support, sustain, and emerge from them.
3 As an artifact, which means accepting that words like “ race” pick out products of the m eaningladen,
historically evolving exercise of human agency ( even if those products still implicate
human biology or psychology).
4 As modern, which means accepting that the most influential forms of race- thinking emerged
during the modern period ( even if those forms have important premodern roots, and even if
other forms reward study).
5 As political, which means accepting that race matters in part because of its role in distributing
social goods, formulating and applying ethico- political norms, and a dvancing – a nd
contesting – schemes for human exploitation, oppression, and extermination.
6 As social, which means accepting that whatever else race is and does, it is not simply a matter
of conscious, individual choices. It involves ascription and interpellation as well as voluntary
identification, and it works in part by framing and informing the choices, habits, perceptions,
and judgments that constitute individuality.
Art Is How We Love Ourselves Now
301
This consensus race theory has clear implications for the study of fine art. If race is an interestingly
modern phenomenon and the modern world is defined in important ways by racial politics, then
the worlds of fine art will exhibit the same forms of resource hoarding, maldistribution of goods,
and distortion of experience and of valuation as the wider social world. Similarly, if race is about
meaning- m aking and self- m aking, then art and the aesthetic will inevitably become resources in
society’s racial projects.
It is important to note in this regard that modernity’s art worlds and its racialized life worlds
have developed together, not just in parallel but to some degree in concert, in dialectical relationship.
The idea of a smallish set of fine arts emerges in the 18th century, just as people like Kant
are refining older, looser ideas of human variation into forms that now register easily as modes of
race-thinking.1 As concepts like “ beauty” and “ genius” and “ taste” begin to take their modern
forms, they provide resources that modern racialism would use to distinguish civilization from
barbarism, humans from savages and brutes. After all, humans can produce and recognize beauty;
sub- humans cannot. This relationship between art and race provided an emotionally airtight ( but
logically porous) proof of white supremacy: we know those creatures are savages because they
can’t appreciate beauty, and we know they can’t appreciate beauty – that their acts of aesthetic
production and appreciation are inferior – because they’re savages.
Tracking the impact of this a rt- r ace entanglement means tracking it across the different precincts
of the art world. Words like “ race” denote practices, habits, institutions, populations, and
so on that exist in dialectical relationships with the elements of aesthetic theory, art criticism, art
history, curatorial work, and, of course, the practices of artmaking. The sections that follow will
explore some of these relationships, focusing on philosophical aesthetics and art history, using a
failure of criticism as an exemplary case. ( There is of course a great deal to say about the ways
curators and artists have engaged race critically, but many more people have already said those
things than have explored the meaning of race for philosophical aesthetics and art history. That
fact shapes the focus of this essay.)
3 Critical Race Theory and the Art world
One way to take race seriously in fine art is to extend the insights of critical race theory, or CRT,
to the art world. “ CRT” originally named a late 20th- century school of legal scholarship but has
since taken on a wider meaning. In this broader sense, it is just what happens when the insights
and impulses of critical theory and of critical social theory are brought to bear on the workings of
race in society. The philosophers and art historians currently setting the tone for the study of race
in fine art explicitly position themselves in the CRT tradition.
In a 2016 article in Art Journal, Camara Dia Holloway uses words like these to announce the
new field that she calls “ critical race art history”:
Drawing on the insights of social, feminist, and queer histories of art, CRAH aims to understand
how race affects how we view the creation, content, and reception of visual objects.
How does race matter when pursuing an artistic education? When patrons award commissions?
When artists decide on their subjects and formal strategies? When artists seek venues
for exhibiting their work? When audiences view the works chosen for display? When collectors
acquire works? And when works are admitted to the canon?
( Holloway, 2016; 89)
Where Holloway brings the insights of CRT, and of the fields that align with it and inform it, to
art history, Monique Roelofs brings them philosophical aesthetics. Drawing from contributions
in feminist theory, postcolonial theory, African diaspora studies, and elsewhere, she develops a
Paul
C. Taylor
302
“ critical race feminist aesthetics” that complicates and deepens the philosopher’s engagement with the study of fine art ( Roelofs, 2018; 366). One key to this enterprise is “ the nexus of aesthetics and race” ( Roelofs, 2014; 29), which Roelofs explains like this:
Racial formations are aesthetic phenomena and aesthetic practices are racialized structures. A theory of the nature of race and racism… must address the place of the aesthetic in processes of racialization. Correlatively, a theory of the aesthetic as a philosophical category… must account for the ways in which structures of aesthetic exchange channel racial passions and perceptions.
( Roelofs, 2012; 291)
The race- aesthetics nexus is a simple but powerful idea that tracks an important bi- directional dynamic. On the one hand, “ racial conceptions historically permeate aesthetic theory” ( Roelofs, 2018; 365). This “ racialized aestheticization” is evident in the work of towering figures like Burke, Hegel, Hume, and Kant, all of whom famously distribute aesthetic values differentially across dif-ferent racial populations.2 On the other hand, aesthetic judgments frequently structure and inform racial formation processes. This “ aestheticized racialization” is evident in the way great swaths of elite and popular culture train ( invite, remind, license) their consumers simply to perceive, directly and with powerful affect, that some people matter more than others.
While ethically problematic racial practices provide the clearest occasions for aestheticizing race and racializing aesthetics, these activities can also advance arguably neutral or liberatory racialization processes. One might argue that any appeal to race for any purpose is ethically worrisome. But some appeals are surely more worrisome than others. For Roelofs, figures like Fanon, Angela Davis, and Kara Walker exemplify the less worrisome ways of implicating the race-aesthetics nexus.
Roelofs and Holloway exemplify a turn in the study of art that by its nature militates against overreliance on abstract theorizing. Race and art are profoundly complex and c ontext- specific enterprises: engaging either one responsibly requires attending with care to the historical and cultural details of specific cases. These details matter all the more when we endeavor to think race and art together. In deference to the importance of context for the critical race turn, the next two sections will explore the implications of this turn in two specific cases.
4 The Dignity of Criticism
According to Henry Louis Gates, Thomas Jefferson’s “ encounter with [Phillis] Wheatley’s Poems in 1779… proved germinal in the history of the criticism of African American writing” ( Gates, 2009; 41). In order to see what he means by this, it’s important to say a little more about Jefferson’s place in the history of r ace- thinking and about the links that he forges between race, aesthetics, and art.
I’ve suggested elsewhere that Jefferson’s Notes on the State of Virginia ( 1787) is a serviceable signpost for the transition from older forms of r ace- t hinking to more recognizably modern ones ( Taylor, 2013). It marks this transition in part because its race- thinking aspires to the condition of science. Consider this passage:
[T]hough for a century and a half we have had under our eyes the races of black and of red men, they have never yet been viewed by us as subjects of natural history. I advance it there-fore as a suspicion only, that the blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time and circumstances, are inferior to the whites in the endowments both of body and mind.
( Jefferson, 1996; 143)
Art
Is How We Love Ourselves Now
303
Jefferson seems here to hesitate in the face of thoughts about gradable racial differences. But he advances
his “ suspicion” about white superiority after he spends several pages documenting the differences
between the races and the deficiencies of n on- white peoples. What looks like diffidence
is actually the open- e ndedness that attends the announcement of a research program. He advances
his thought “ as a suspicion” only because he recognizes the need for more systematically gathered
data – because “ to justify a general conclusion, requires many observations” ( Jefferson, 1996; 153).
Interestingly, this prolegomenon to scientific racism is rooted in the aesthetics of racial
difference.
The first difference which strikes us is that of colour…. And is this difference of no importance?
Is it not the foundation of a greater or less share of beauty in the two races? Are not the
fine mixtures of red and white, the expressions of every passion by greater or less suffusions
of colour in the one, preferable to that eternal monotony, which reigns in the countenances,
that immoveable veil of black which covers all the emotions of the other race? Add to these,
flowing hair, a more elegant symmetry of form…. The circumstance of superior beauty, is
thought worthy attention in the propagation of our horses, dogs, and other domestic animals;
why not in that of man?
( Jefferson, 1996; 138)
This appeal to the superior bodily beauty of white people is one of the foundational moments in an
American tradition of white supremacist somatic aesthetics. It also provides a clear window onto
Jefferson’s prejudices and onto the prejudices of his time. In addition, read against the backdrop of
Jefferson’s infamous commitment to owning and using Sally Hemings’ body, it is a stark reminder
that race is importantly shot through with desires, aversions, mystifications, and delusions that
push race theory beyond social ontology and into domains like psychoanalysis and queer theory.
What matters for current purposes, though, is the way Jefferson’s discussion reveals the connections
between the aesthetic and epistemic aspects of racialization. Jefferson simply asserts his
prejudices, assigning greater and lesser “ shares” of beauty with unwavering confidence. He then
folds these prejudices into an account of bodily beauty that purports to have scientific and practical
significance.
This commitment to turning aesthetic prejudice into truth claims and practical imperatives
shapes the foray into literary criticism that captures Gates’ interest. One of Jefferson’s contemporaries
was a poet named Phillis Wheatley, who is best known today as one of the founding figures
of African American literature (‘ Wheatley, Phillis: Introduction’, 2005; Winkler, 2020). During
her early adulthood she became a cause celebre for antislavery activists and for proponents of black
humanity ( these categories overlap but are not coterminous) because her poetry seemed to reject,
both by its mere existence and sometimes with more or less explicit exhortation, assumptions of
black inhumanity. This was a matter of such import that a group of cultural eminences gathered in
Boston to interrogate Wheatley in person, “ to verify the authorship of her poems and to answer a
much larger question: was a Negro capable of producing literature?” ( Gates, 2009; 10)
One of Jefferson’s correspondents extolled Wheatley’s virtues and provoked him to comment.
Given the opportunity to exercise critical judgment, Jefferson chose instead to deny the appropriateness
of such a judgment. “ The compositions published under [Wheatley’s] name,” he explained,
“ are below the dignity of criticism” ( Jefferson, 1996; 140).
The reasoning that leads Jefferson to this claim is worth reproducing in its entirety, such as its
entirety is:
Never yet could I find that a black had uttered a thought above the level of plain narration;
never see even an elementary trait of painting or sculpture…. Misery is often the parent of
Paul C. Taylor
304
the most affecting touches in poetry.— Among the blacks is misery enough, God knows, but no poetry. Love is the peculiar oestrum of the poet. Their love is ardent, but it kindles the senses only, not the imagination. Religion indeed has produced a Phyllis Whately [sic]; but it could not produce a poet.
( Jefferson, 1996; 140)
He then goes on to discuss Ignatius Sancho and doesn’t mention Wheatley again.
Jefferson’s dismissiveness about Wheatley’s work has not stood the test of time, but this says less about Jefferson’s obtuseness as a c ritic – s ince he refused to engage as a c ritic – t han about the decay of the theoretical grounds for his refusal. Those grounds are on full display in an earlier passage from the Notes, where he argues that black life “ appears to participate more of sensation than reflection” ( Jefferson, 1996; 139). If, as Gates points out on his behalf, “[t]rue art requires a sublime combination of feeling and reflection,” then humanoid creatures that are incapable of reflection are necessarily incapable of producing art (G ates, 2009; 4 4–4 5). Wheatley’s poetry was not, could not have been, a proper subject of criticism, and hence did not require or deserve sus-tained critical scrutiny.
Needless to say, Jefferson’s anti-b lack and white supremacist philosophical anthropology no longer tracks the weight of informed opinion. Jefferson’s white s upremacist – o r, more or less for short, whitely – c ritical process remains relevant, though. It helpfully shows one way to operation-alize the r ace- aesthetics nexus in aesthetic experience and in art world theory and practice.
To point to whitely ways of activating the nexus is to invoke a kind of race- theoretic short-hand. Race- t alk is a way of denoting ( among other things) certain complexes of epistemic and phenomenological conditions that shape judgment, perception, and cognition. These conditions constrained and shaped Jefferson’s capacity to engage Wheatley’s work, effectively rendering her aesthetic achievement invisible to him and encouraging him to render it invisible to others. The production of invisibility is a prominent outcome of mobilizing the race- a esthetics nexus to do the work of whiteliness.
There are at least three dimensions to this racialized production of invisibility, each of which still has its place in the contemporary art world.3 First, Jefferson was unable ( or unwilling, albeit at so deep a level that the distinction begins to lose its purchase) to register the quality of Wheatley’s work, and might in fact be said not to have perceived it at all. Since the work was in effect invisible to him, its relevance to his status as a cultural a uthority – a nd its author’s relevance to his status as a scientist and champion of something like human rights – was similarly invisible. Finally, his critical (n on-) ju dgment effectively excluded Wheatley and her work from the institutional ma-trices that allow art to circulate and that allow artists to benefit from this circulation: Wheatley and her work became invisible in the art world, in much the way that led Michele Wallace to complain about the “ restraint of trade” that excludes n on- w hite culture work from hegemonic art institutions ( Wallace, 2004).
5 Laure of Paris ( 1863)
Jefferson’s refusal of critical judgment shows how racialized forms of epistemic numbness and phenomenological constriction are bound up with the concrete workings of the race- a esthetics nexus.4 Culture work in a racialized world, like race work in the cultural world, involves specific forms of perception, interpretation, and curation. These racialized forms of aesthetic respon-siveness have important and specifiable impacts on culture workers even in times more racially enlightened than Jefferson’s heyday.
Recent re-readings of Manet’s Olympia ( 1863) highlight some p ost- Jeffersonian ways of op-erationalizing the r ace- aesthetics nexus. Manet’s pathbreaking work both draws on and diverges
Art
Is How We Love Ourselves Now
305
from representational traditions epitomized by Titian’s Venus of Urbino, which, Denise Murrell reminds
us, is the “ Venetian Renaissance painting invariably cited as [Manet’s] source….” ( Murrell,
2018; 53). Many of these deviations are grist for the mill of standard art- h istorical analysis:
“ Manet flattens the spatial depth, refusing the Renaissance perspective of Titian’s work,” and he
“ transforms… Titian’s invitingly diffident courtesan into a confrontational s ex- f or- p ay worker”
( Murrell, 2018; 53). But the formal deviations involving the black maids are of particular interest
to a critical race analysis. Murrell explains:
While Titian’s maid is proportionally much smaller than the courtesan, Manet’s maid assumes
a spatial dimension nearly equivalent to that of the prostitute. And though positioned behind
and subordinate to the prostitute, Manet’s maid faces us from the foreground of the picture,
in contrast to her counterpart, who turns away far in the background depth.
(Murrell, 2018; 53–54)
Standard a rt- h istorical accounts notice Manet’s deviations but read them not as attempts to
draw attention to the black woman but as devices for defining the white woman. These readings
tend to follow Sander Gilman in treating the maid as a figure for modern ideas about “ the heightened,
deviant sexuality of black women,” ideas that in the symbolic economy of the painting express
“ intensified anxieties about the abnormal sexuality of the white prostitute” ( Grigsby, 2015;
432).5 Read in this way, the maid becomes “ a subservient foil, a woman that even the keen eyes
of Manet scholars… could all but ignore” ( Grigsby, 2015; 435). But the easiness of this reading
enabled critics to set aside Manet’s other revisionary i nterventions – a s if these were beneath the
dignity of c riticism – a nd to set aside with them the harder and more interesting readings that
might otherwise become available.
A more race- a ware reading declines to return the black woman to the thematic background
as swiftly as possible and looks instead for a more unified account of Manet’s deviations. Grigsby
begins in this spirit by noting that Manet’s maid “ brought the colonies to the metropole. She
heightened viewers’ awareness of racial difference and the colonial history of slavery….” ( Grigsby,
2015; 435). Murrell deepens this thought by pointing out that the maid is dressed in a way that
requires explanation:
The maid wears a bulky white dress of a vaguely European style, not the brightly patterned,
seductively draped, and exotically styled garment typical of nineteenth- c entury depictions of
black women within female spaces….
( Murrell, 2018; 55)
After building up some resources from the histories of art and of fashion in post- r evolutionary
France, Murrell offers an explanation. The maid’s clothes reveal her to be a more or less normal
member of the 1 9th- century Parisian proletariat. She is pointedly not another of the dark, exotic
foreigners that routinely appear in European visual culture.
Murrell’s r eading – t he fascinating nuances of which I’ve just barely touched o n – has several important
implications. First, it shows that one can read the painting in a way that deepens the viewer’s
p re- t heoretic experience instead of repudiating that experience. For viewers not habituated to
whitely perceptual codes or to art history’s alignment with those codes, Olympia is a “ painting that
has two figures” – rather than one figure with a humanoid accessory – “ who, with almost equal
interest, engage [one’s] attention” ( Green, 2019). Murrell’s reading saves that intuition.
Second, this harder reading saves the pre- t heoretic intuition not by narrowing the scope of
critical engagement but by deepening and expanding it. Murrell considers more of what’s going
on in the painting instead of letting racial ideologies artificially constrain the class of relevant
Paul
C. Taylor
306
features. It matters that the maid is fully clothed, and wearing just those clothes, and that we see her face, and that her face is recognizable as the face of a specific woman. It matters, in particular, that the model, a woman Manet knew as Laure, posed several times for him and belonged to an “ interracial network of friendships and professional connections among” artists and other resi-dents of mid- 19th- century Paris ( Murrell, 2018; 10). All of this makes it harder to credit a view that sees the maid as a generalized racial symbol for deviant sexuality.
Recovering Manet’s model and restoring her, and the figure she posed for, to the fashion trends and the communities of 1860s Paris points toward a third conclusion: far from being the conduit for a generalized form of sexual racism, Manet turns out to be a chronicler of a richly interracial world. Olympia stands revealed as “ among the early images in Salon painting in which… a black woman is de- Orientalized, and portrayed… in a modernist way, as part of the working class of Paris” ( Murrell, 2018; 57). It also becomes apparent that Manet’s work here in some ways “ has stronger affinities with abolitionist works by contemporaneous artists of color than with those of his Paris colleagues” ( Murrell, 2018; 58).
Approaching Olympia from the perspective of critical race art history yields several benefits for students of the work and of the art world. By focusing attention on aspects of the piece that might otherwise escape notice, this approach allows for a more comprehensive engagement with the totality of the work. Similarly, it invites a more nuanced engagement with the artist and with the social worlds in which work and artist circulated. Finally, it models a more nuanced critical sensibility that does not limit itself to obvious moral errors – remember: one target of the Murrell- Grigsbyre-readingofOlympia is Gilman’s flawed attempt at anti-racist critique.
6 Conclusion
It is tempting to think of the entanglements of race and art on the old “ race relations” model, on which the main question is how large, stable human groups called races relate to each other in and through the arts. That is not the story I’ve tried to tell here. The entanglements in play here involve relations in the broader philosophical sense, which allows one to consider how all sorts of things – p eople and groups to be sure, but also institutions, cultural meanings, cognitive contents, affective experiences, material conditions, and much else b esides – s tand with respect to each other. ( This thought is in the neighborhood of what Roelofs calls “ aesthetic relationality,” but measuring this proximity any more precisely would require more space than I have available (Roelofs,2014).)
Bringing a critical race aesthetics perspective to the cases discussed above reveals entangle-ments that often succeed in escaping notice, despite their concrete implications for art world activity. It is easy in hindsight to see how Jefferson’s cultivated ignorance about black humanity was entangled with his ambitions as a man of science and as a man of letters, and how all of this led him to shirk the burdens of criticism and exclude Wheatley from his literary art world. It is similarly easy to tease out the art world’s entanglements with certain constellations of race, class, and gender dynamics – t he dynamics, to put it swiftly, that long excluded people like Denise Murrell from elite a rt- historical spaces and people like Laure from the ideas people in those spaces had about who counts as a modern E uropean – and to imagine how these entanglements enabled art historians to erase Laure from Manet’s depiction of Parisian life.
The critical race perspective also helps explain why these entanglements escape notice and how to haul them back into awareness. It is hard for people to notice what they aren’t noticing, and to notice that they aren’t noticing it, because that’s how invidious r ace- t hinking works. It cultivates forms of epistemic numbness and phenomenological constriction that limit the possibilities for aesthetic responsiveness and for self- criticism in the face of one’s lack of responsiveness.
Art
Is How We Love Ourselves Now
307
In light of the elusiveness and persistence of these numbing and constraining forces, it is important
to think about the critical race turn in aesthetics as an invitation to undertake a practice of
self- criticism. Taking race seriously means, among other things, cultivating the capacity to interrogate
the way broader social forces work in and on and through the self. It means being willing to
subject oneself to criticism and to accept criticism from others, in relation not just to one’s actions
but to one’s perceptual and affective habits. Perhaps most importantly, it means, as Medina makes
clear, creating and inhabiting environments rife with opportunities for the “ epistemic friction”
that encourages agents to reconsider what they’re about.
Opportunities for epistemic friction often emerge at the intersections of aesthetic publics and
art world communities. This is why diversity matters ( in, for example, the leadership of museums
and other cultural institutions), though diversity is surely not enough. And it is why the fact of art
world pluralism matters. There are many art worlds, and one of the stories of art in recent decades
has been the increasing frequency and openness with which the worlds organized around people
like Manet and his most prominent commentators find themselves dealing with people who also
circulate in artistic counterpublics. I think of these people as art world- t ravelers, in the sense of
world- traveling that one learns from María Lugones ( Lugones, 1987).
Art world travelers have been at the center of my argument here. Murrell undertook her studies
in part to find a way to make a rt- historically visible the experience of someone who hadn’t yet
accepted the hegemonic art world’s ways of ( not) seeing. Roelofs and Holloway use insights from
adjacent disciplines to make room in philosophical aesthetics and art history for ways of thinking
and perceiving that are underrepresented in those spaces. Gates revisits the Wheatley affair in part
to bring back into view the centuries- long tradition of criticizing African American literature that
Jefferson unwittingly ( and obtusely) helped l aunch – and to restore Wheatley to her rightful status
as a resident of Jefferson’s cultural milieu ( though her residency status was always in question).
It is important to note, though, that travel is not an end in itself. Travel to the hegemonic art
world is certainly not its own reward. With more space, I would turn at this point to some of the
many fi gures – l ike Theaster Gates, Sonya Clark, Mickalene Thomas, or Kerry James M arshall –
who complicate the metaphor of world- traveling by being native both to the mainstream art
world and to certain of its counterpublics, and who then use this flexible art world citizenship to
challenge assumptions about art and about society. In deference to the limited space I have left,
I will simply report the words that another of these figures uses to convey the thrill of building,
aspiring to build, an alternative art world rooted in c ounter- hegemonic ideas about gender and
race. Here is how writer Lisa Jones describes the experience of working with others to establish
the 1980s performance art collective, Rodeo Caldonia H igh- Fidelity Performance Theater:
Twelve women, sometimes more, in our twenties and giddy with our own possibility. We
were gonna do theater. Performance pieces we were calling them. We didn’t care much about
genres and structures and things. Our need was to get out in public and act up; to toss off
the expectations laid by our genitals, our melanin count, and our college degrees…. Art, says
Nan Goldin, is about leaving a record no one can revise. We are not thinking of hereafters.
Art is how we love ourselves now.
( Jones, 2017; 302–303)
Notes
1 See Kivy, P. ( 2012) ‘ What Happened in the Eighteenth Century: The ‘ Modern System’ Re- E xamined
(Again)’, The British Journal of Aesthetics, vol. 52, no. 1, p p. 61– 7 4; commenting on Kristeller, P.O. ( 1951)
‘ The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in the History of Aesthetics Part I’, Journal of the History of
Ideas, vol. 12, no. 4, p p. 4 96– 527.
Paul
C. Taylor
308
2 In the Third Critique, for example, “[f]igures of American Indians and n on- Europeans regularly de note observers whose perceptions fall short of the properly aesthetic, such as the ‘ Iroquois sachem,’ who judges in accordance with interest, failing to evince an adequately disinterested form of aesthetic appraisal” ( Roelofs, 2014; 37).
3 These are three of the four dimensions of invisibility that I discuss in Chapter 2 of ( Taylor, 2016).
4 The idea of epistemic numbness, along with much of what I do with it in this essay, comes from ( Medina, 2013). I explore the idea of phenomenological constriction in the discussion of Jefferson and Sally Hemings in Chapter 4 of ( Taylor, 2016).
5 Grigsby is thinking here of ( Gilman, 1985).
Bibliography
Du Bois, W.E.B. ( 1926) ‘ Criteria of Negro Art’, The Crisis, vol. 32, p p. 290– 297, viewed 24 August 2020, http://www.webdubois.org/dbCriteriaNArt.html.
Gates, H.L. ( 2009) The Trials of Phillis Wheatley: America’s First Black Poet and Her Encounters with the Founding Fathers, New York: Basic Books.
Gilman, S.L. ( 1985) ‘ Black Bodies, White Bodies: Toward an Iconography of Female Sexuality in Late Nineteenth- Century Art, Medicine, and Literature’, Critical Inquiry, vol. 12, no. 1, p p. 2 04– 242.
Green, T. ( 2019) ‘ No. 375: Posing Modernity, Ralston Crawford’, Modern Art Notes Podcast, viewed 19 August2019,https://manpodcast.com/portfolio/no-375-posing-modernity-ralston-crawford/.
Grigsby, D.G. ( 2015) ‘ Still Thinking about Olympia’s Maid’, Art Bulletin, vol. 97, no. 4, p p. 430– 451, doi: 10.1080/00043079.2015.1014753.
Holloway, C.D. ( 2016) ‘ Critical Race Art History’, Art Journal, vol. 75, no. 1, p p. 89– 9 2, doi: 10.1080/ 00043249.2016.1171548
Jefferson, T. ( 1996) Notes on the State of Virginia, Peden, W. ( ed.), Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
ones, L. ( 2017) ‘ She Came With the Rodeo,’ in Morris, C. and Hockley, R. ( eds.), We Wanted a Revolution: Black Radical Women, 1965–85, New York: Brooklyn Museum, p p. 3 02– 312.
Kivy, P. ( 2012) ‘ What Happened in the Eighteenth Century: The ‘ Modern System’ R e- Examined ( Again)’, The British Journal of Aesthetics, vol. 52, no. 1, p p. 6 1– 74;
Kristeller, P.O. ( 1951) ‘ The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in the History of Aesthetics Part I’, Journal of the History of Ideas, vol. 12, no. 4, p p. 4 96– 527.
Lugones, M. ( 1987) ‘ Playfulness, ‘ World’- Travelling, and Loving Perception,’ Hypatia, vol. 2, no. 2, p p. 3– 19.
Medina, J. ( 2013) The Epistemology of Resistance, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Murrell, D. ( 2018) Posing Modernity: The Black Model from Manet and Matisse to Today, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Roelofs, M. ( 2012) ‘ Racialization as an Aesthetic Production’, in Taylor, P.C. ( ed.), The Philosophy of Race, Vol. III: Race- i ng Beauty, Goodness, and Right, New York: Routledge, p p. 291– 32 8. Reprinted from Yancy, G ( ed.) ( 2005) White on White/ Black on Black, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, p p. 83– 124.
Roelofs, M. ( 2014) The Cultural Promise of the Aesthetic, e- book, London: Bloomsbury Publishing, Kindle Edition.
Roelofs, M. ( 2018) ‘ R ace- i ng Aesthetic Theory’, in Alcoff, L.A., Anderson, L., and Taylor, P.C. ( eds.), The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Race, New York: Routledge, pp. 365–379.
Taylor, P.C. ( 2013) Race: A Philosophical Introduction, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Taylor, P.C. ( 2016) Black is Beautiful: A Philosophy of Black Aesthetics, Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell.
Wallace, M. ( 2004) ‘M odernism, Postmodernism, and the Problem of the Visual in Afro- A merican Cul ture’, in Wallace, M. ( ed.), Dark Designs and Visual Culture, Durham: Duke University Press, p p. 364– 378.
Wheatley, P. ( 2005) ‘ Introduction’, in Bomarito, J., and Hunter, J.W. ( eds.), Feminism in Literature: A Gale Critical Companion, vol. 1, e - b ook, Detroit: Gale, Thomson Gale, viewed 19 August 2020, https:// l ink- gale-com.proxy.library.vanderbilt.edu/apps/doc/CX3441600071/GVRL?u=nash87800&sid=GVRL&xid=96467ba2.
Winkler, E. ( 2020) ‘ How Phillis Wheatley Was Recovered Through History’, The New Yorker, 30 July, viewed August 19, 2020 https://www.newyorker.com/books/under-review/how-phillis-wheatley-was-recovered-through-history.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-38 309
31PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS OF ART
Thomas E. Wartenberg
1 Introduction
The question of whether painting and sculpture can make contributions to philosophy has not received the sort of attention that has been accorded film and literature as sources of philosophical insight.1 Perhaps because the former art forms have generally though not always excluded words from their images, their connection to philosophy— a d iscipline that seems to rely on explicit verbal statements and a rguments— seems more remote and less easy to establish.2
Nonetheless, there is a body of both works of art and claims by philosophers and art critics that use art to support and develop philosophical ideas and theories. In this chapter, I discuss a range of works of art— engravings, paintings, and sculptures— that present philosophical claims. In the first two sections, I discuss works that were created to present philosophical ideas. The next section focuses on philosophers who have seen philosophical content in works of art that helps them explain their philosophical theories. I then turn to Modernist art, examining how works in this tradition raise philosophical questions and make philosophical claims about the nature of art itself. Finally, I look at works of art that were inspired by the writings of the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, asking to what extent they actually help us understand his ideas.
2 Medieval Broadsides of Aristotelian Metaphysics
The first artwork I will discuss that attempts to convey philosophical insight was made in 1614 when a Franciscan professor of philosophy named Martin Meurisse, with the assistance of the en-graver Leonard Gaultier, produced the first of four large engravings that present visual representa-tions of Aristotelian philosophy. This work, referred to here as Descriptio, is entitled Artificiosa totius logices descriptio ( Artful description of logic in its entirety). ( The work can be accessed at https:// blogs.princeton.edu/notabilia/2013/12/17/martin-meurisses-garden-of-logic--1614/.)
Broadsides like Descriptio were part of the culture of philosophical education in early modern Europe and functioned as useful tools in the preparation of students for their rigorous formal examinations known as disputations. They provided students with visual representations of the content of Aristotle’s texts in an effort to help them memorize features of his theory for their examinations.
These broadsides are complex works that combine words and images in an attempt to render philosophical ideas visually. Descriptio presents all of Aristotelian logic in a single, albeit plural image. The engraving consists of a large garden divided into two walled spaces surrounded by a
Thomas
E. Wartenberg
310
variety of different figures and a large multi- trunked tree at the top being revealed by a bearded
figure on the right carrying a book, viz. Aristotle. On the left top, the medieval philosopher Duns
Scotus is portrayed sitting at a table writing. The idea is that Aristotle first developed logic but that
Scotus elucidated his meaning.
The architectural features of the etching stand for the different operations of the mind that
are presented sequentially in the different segments of the work. The etching’s lowest portion
contains a representation of the acquisition of concepts in the first stage; moves on, in the second,
higher one, to a depiction of the formation of propositions employing the terms acquired in the
first; finally in the third stage shows the combination of propositions into syllogisms, the ultimate
content of logic.
One question that arises is whether these broadsides are illustrations of Aristotle’s philosophy
or something more. To see that the latter is true, consider how the Descriptio presents the creation
of a proposition ( see illustration 31.1).
Two palm trees are shown with their branches entwined. Palm trees are dioecious, i.e. their
male and female flower grow on different plants. At the time, it was thought that the trees reproduced
by intertwining the branches of different sexed trees. The engraving includes a great deal of
text, labeling the trunks of the two trees “ noun” and “ verb,” in addition to giving further descriptions
of their logical function. The image of these entwined trees creates a visual and biological
analogy to the formation of propositions.
To what extent can we say that this etching is really doing philosophy rather than just illustrating
it? Susanna Berger ( 2017) claims that this visual representation of a proposition is an advance
over the typical textbook of the time’s definition of a proposition as the sum of its two p arts—
noun and v erb— because it shows that a proposition is a new unity created out of the two distinct
parts. As such, the etching suggests the need for a philosophical account of propositions that explains
how such unity is created.
This is an example of how these broadsides provide innovative visual representations of the
elements of logic through a combination of text and image. In it, an image combines words and
pictures to give rise to an i dea— i n this case of the unity that a proposition i s— t hat is expressed
visually. As such, Descriptio actually makes a contribution to the philosophical understanding of
propositions that would have to wait for an explicit theorization until Kant’s theory of judgment.
3 Early Modern Frontispieces of Philosophical Texts
Books published in Europe during the early modern period ( roughly 1600– 1800) often contained
etchings as frontispieces. Generally, as in the case of Margaret Cavendish’s Grounds
of Natural Philosophy ( 1668), the image is essentially a portrait of the book’s author. ( The engraving
can be seen at https://www.amazon.com/Natural-Philosophy-Margaret-Cavendish-
Scientific/ dp/ 0801894433.) But in some cases, the engraving presents the reader with a visual
interpretation of the main claims made by a philosophical text.
This is the case with Abraham Bosse’s famous frontispiece for Thomas Hobbes’ Leviathan
( 1651). ( The frontispiece can be viewed at https:// en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/ Leviathan_( Hobbes_
book)#/ media/ File:Leviathan_by_Thomas_Hobbes.jpg.) Bosse’s image is striking and has often
been thought to be a clear representation of claims Hobbes makes about the sovereign. However,
the image itself has a number of different elements that are often neglected in interpreting its significance.
In part, this is because the work, like Descriptio, is a plural image, and interpreters have
failed to see how important this fact is to understanding it.
The most obvious element of Bosse’s engraving is the large regal figure shown from the waist
up in the upper half of the engraving. The figure has a crown on his head and carries a sword in
Philosophical
Works of Art
311
his right hand along with a bishop’s crozier. The body of the colossus is made up of the bodies of
many small human beings. He is poised over a landscape with a town in the foreground and a hilly
landscape towards the rear. This figure is clearly the sovereign who, made up of his subjects, unites
them into a single being that joins pastoral and religious powers.
However, the lower half of the engraving is also important to understanding the engraving’s
significance. It is divided into thirds. In the middle, the title and author of the book are specified.
Both the left and right sides are divided into five small vertical panels. The l eft- h and images are
all secular, while the right- h and ones are religious, and there is a correlation between the images.
At the bottom, there is a battle scene on the left and a religious disputation of the sort in which
the thesis prints like Descriptio might have been deployed. Immediately above them are the tools
used in the two disputes, weapons of war and those of logic, respectively. A canon on the left is
matched with thunderbolts on the right. Then come a crown and a bishop’s miter. Finally, a castle
is paired with a church.
How were these disparate elements of the print to be understood? If we follow the logic of
the composite image we have just considered, we will realize that such plural images were meant
to be viewed in a specific order, here from the bottom to the top. So, Bosse’s image might be
interpreted, beginning at the bottom of the two columns of images, as representing the process
of generating the state out of the warring and disputing individuals shown in the bottom panels.
The frontispiece attempts to visually represent a substantial generation, that is, the formation of a
new substance out of its parts.
Berger suggests that we should see the Leviathan frontispiece as a depiction of substantial generation,
with the substance that is generated being the commonwealth. As she puts it: “ the sovereign,
the soul of the commonwealth, functions to unify and animate the individual members,
its matter, into a single body politic, transforming many into one” [Berger, p. 206]. When interpreted
in this manner, the engraving does more than simply illustrate some of the central
claims made by Hobbes about the sovereign, for it also provides a visual analogue for the book’s
argument concerning the generation of the state. By including all of this in a single visual image,
Bosse has provided an illustration of a number of different aspects of Hobbes’ claims in Leviathan.
Slightly more than a century later, Jean- Jacques Rousseau’s Emile ( 1979) included a set of engravings.
As a young boy, Rousseau was apprenticed to an engraver. Although he was mistreated
and ran away, his experience gave him expertise in the process of creating engravings. So, it’s no
surprise to find that many of his works include them, with his novel Julie or the New Heloise being
the most lavishly illustrated. But the five engravings of his philosophical work Emile are the works
that most clearly link a philosophical claim with a visual representation albeit in an unexpected
manner.
Each of the five engravings included in the volume illustrates one of the books that make up
Emile. Designed by Charles Eisen, each presents a scene from Greek mythology in which some
type of education is taking place, which is not surprising given the thematic content of Emile. The
first two engravings show scenes from Achilles’ life; the third, a mythic scene involving Hermes
writing scientific knowledge on a pillar; the fourth, depicts Orpheus singing of the gods to his
fellow Greeks; and the fifth, Circe offering herself to Ulysses as his shipmates, transformed into
pigs, look on.
Rousseau provides a title for each of the e ngravings— Thetis, Charon, Hermes, Orpheus, and
Circe— t hat emphasizes the mythic figure doing the teaching rather than the narrative of the
event depicted. This initially suggests that the viewer of the engravings should focus on the
teacher or preceptor rather than the person being educated. In addition, each illustration also includes
a reference to a page number of Emile in its top right corner, so that the attentive viewer of
the engravings will refer to the text in order to see what passage Rousseau had in mind in order
Thomas E. Wartenberg
312
to determine what the relationship between the engraving and the textual passage might be. Rousseau also provides brief “ explanations of the illustrations,” though these are little more than descriptions of the scenes presented in the engravings.
Given Rousseau’s educational agenda, one might suspect that the engravings would present models of education drawn from Greek mythology. It turns out that, contrary to our expectations, the engravings illustrate bad educational practices that are examples of ways of treating the young that should be avoided.
Consider the first illustration. (It can be accessed at https://www.alamy.com/stock-photo-jean-jacques-rousseau-l-mile-ou-de-l-ducation-thetis-plunging-achilles-83364862.html.)Itoc-curs opposite the title page of the first book of Emile and depicts the sea nymph Thetis dipping her son Achilles in the River Styx. That the title does not include a reference to Achilles is surprising, especially since it occurs in a book about the education of a young boy, Emile. So, the emphasis in the engraving is on Achilles’ mother, a fact stressed by Rousseau’s explication of the illustration: “ The illustration, which relates to the first book and serves as a frontispiece to the work, represents Thetis plunging her son in the Styx to make him invulnerable” [Rousseau, 1979, p . 36].
Should we take Thetis’ attempt to make Achilles invulnerable as a model for what the edu-cation of Emile should aim at? As I have suggested, the answer is, “N o.” Rousseau believes that invulnerability should not be the goal of education, for knowledge of danger is required for the valor that should be the goal of education. A modern- day Thetis, he suggests, should be concerned with their charge’s soul, not just their body. As he says, the goal should not simply be to preserve the child, i.e. keep the young boy alive, but to create the man, i.e. to make him into a person who has as much autonomy as a person can. This interpretation is confirmed by another comment that Rousseau makes that critically invokes Thetis’ attempt to render Achilles invulnerable. Late in book V, Rousseau tells Emile, “ it is in vain that I have dipped your soul in the Styx; I was not able to make it everywhere invulnerable” [Rousseau, 1979, p . 443]. What Emile is vulnerable to are his own passions, particularly his love of Sophie. But what is significant from our point of view is Rousseau’s reinvocation of Thetis’ action, only this time transferring it from the literal dipping of Achilles in the Styx to a metaphoric assessment of J ean- Jacques’ rearing of Emile.
To generalize, the Emile engravings are works that present inappropriate models for educating the young. A viewer will thus approach Rousseau’s text aware of a view of education that Rous-seau rejects, bringing into relief the central claims of his theory while functioning as tests for attentive readers, who are left to discern the educational errors depicted in the engravings. This use of engravings is, I believe, unique in the history of visual renderings of philosophy.
4 Philosophers Use Paintings to Explain Their Theories
The visual images we have considered so far were all designed in relation to philosophical texts that they were intended to illustrate. I now turn to independently existing works of art that phi-losophers have turned to in order to illustrate their own philosophical ideas.
I begin with Friedrich Nietzsche. In his first mature work, The Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche tells the story of the wisdom of Silenus. Asked to say what the best is for human beings, Silenus replies: “ The very best thing is utterly beyond your reach not to have been born, not to be, to be nothing. However, the second best thing for you is: to die soon” [Nietzsche, 1999, p. 23]. The grounds for Silenus’ claim are the suffering that he sees as the truth of human existence.
If we took Silenus’ claim to heart, there would be no reason to go on living. In order to find a reason to live, human beings need to create an optimistic worldview, one that makes life bearable in the face of the inevitability of suffering and frustration Silenus highlights. As a result, human beings have created an idealized world, according to Nietzsche, one that he identifies with the Greek God Apollo, the Sun God. This is the world of reason and rationality, one that is also
Philosophical
Works of Art
313
embodied in Christianity and that Nietzsche contrasts with a Silenus- inspired view that he conceptualizes
by means of Dionysus, the Greek God of wine and revelry.
To bolster his argument, Nietzsche turns to a painting. His idea is that his readers will see the
painting as supporting the ideas he has just articulated. If there are grounds to see the painting as
independently presenting the distinction between the truth of the inevitability of suffering and the
illusory optimism of human rationality, it will serve to support Nietzsche’s claims.
The painting that Nietzsche invokes is Transfiguration (1516–1520) by Raphael (1483–1520).
( This painting can be viewed at https:// en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/ Transfiguration_( Raphael).) This
remarkable painting is composed of two scenes from the Bible. At the top, Jesus’ transfiguration
is shown as he appears floating towards heaven dressed all in white, flanked by Moses and Elijah.
In the lower half of the painting, we see the Apostles trying to free a boy from his possession by
the devil. This portion of the painting is very dark, standing in marked contrast to the light upper
portion with Jesus at its center.
Nietzsche claims that the lower half of the picture represents “ a reflection of the eternal, primal
pain, the only ground of the world.” From this dark, somewhat chaotic world, there arises the vision
of “ a luminous hovering in purest bliss and in w ide- e yed contemplation, free of all pain” [Nietzsche,
p. 26]. That is, the bifurcation of the painting itself reflects the distinction Nietzsche has drawn between
the truth about human life and the illusion people have created to make life bearable.
Nietzsche thus uses this painting as an illustration of the dichotomy he creates between the
Dionysiac and the Apollonian even though this cannot have been what Raphael attempted to
show in his painting. What Nietzsche realizes is that the painting’s depiction of the difference
between earthly and heavenly existence can help him explain his own views about the nature
of suffering and the creation of illusions, providing him with a means of getting his audience to
literally see what he is driving at.
The second example of a philosopher who turns to a work of art in order to support their
metaphysical view is Martin Heidegger. In his long and deceptively titled essay, “ The Origin of
the Work of Art,” Heidegger is interested in understanding how art functions to reveal truth.
Because he sees the human world as determined historically, Heidegger uses a number of examples
from different time periods. The one that is most relevant to our purposes is Vincent Van Gogh’s
painting, Shoes (1886).3 ( Van Gogh’s painting can be seen at https:// www.vangoghmuseum.nl/
en/ collection/ s0011V1962.) Heidegger identifies the shoes not as Van Gogh’s, but as belonging to
a peasant woman who has taken them off at the end of a long day of work. It’s worth quoting his
description of the painting at some length.
From out of the dark opening of the w ell- worn insides of the shoes the toil of the worker’s
tread stares forth. In the crudely solid heaviness of the shoes accumulates the tenacity of the
slow trudge through the far- s tretching and ever- u niform furrows of the field swept by a
raw wind. On the leather lies the dampness and richness of the soil. Under the soles slides
the loneliness of the field- p ath as evening falls. The shoes vibrate with the silent call of the
earth, its silent gift of the ripening grain, its unexplained self- r efusal in the wintry field. This
equipment is pervaded by uncomplaining worry as to the certainty of bread, wordless joy at
having once more withstood want, trembling before the impending birth, and shivering at
the surrounding menace of death. This equipment belongs to the earth and finds protection
in the world of the peasant woman. From out of this protected belonging the equipment itself
rises to its resting-within-itself.
[Heidegger, 2002, p . 14]
Van Gogh’s painting gives us a clear visual image of some of Heidegger’s central ideas about
humans inhabiting a world. While the painting’s manifest content is simply the two shoes,
Thomas
E. Wartenberg
314
Heidegger suggests that there is a much richer latent content to the painting, for the two shoes reveal the existence of an entire network of objects and attitudes that make up the world of the peasant. So, the worn nature of the shoes reveals the effort the peasant woman has to make in going to and from the fields, where she labors all day wearing those shoes. The shoes also call to mind the concerns the peasant woman has about the weather and having enough to eat, among other things.
Heidegger’s use of the painting provides support for his conception of “ world.” As with many philosophical terms, Heidegger thinks that our usual understanding obscures a more profound meaning. Rather than seeing the world as “ the sum of all existing entities,” he takes human beings to inhabit worlds that embody aspects of their experience. Since his account of “ world” in Being and Time is quite abstract, his use of Shoes to illuminate the world of the peasant woman provides us with significant information about how he understands this very fundamental concept, show-ing how one’s world reflects features of one’s social situation.
The final philosopher I will consider in this section of the chapter is Michel Foucault. Although Foucault wrote about a number of different artists,4 I only have space to consider his use of Velasquez’s Las Meninas in his book The Order of Things ( 1970). ( The painting can be seen at https:// www.museo-delprado.es/en/the-collection/art-work/las-meninas/9fdc7800-9ade-48b0-ab8b-edee94ea877f.)
The Order of Things attempts to lay out two major transformations in our fundamental meta-physical assumptions, what Foucault calls an episteme. During the Renaissance, Foucault claims, the episteme is based upon the resemblance that things have to one another; during the Classical Age—roughly from 1600–1800—representation becomes fundamental; while in Modernity, it is organic structure that is paramount. Foucault’s agenda is to show that “ man” and the disciplines based upon that concept— t he human sciences of biology, economics, and philology [Foucault, p. 345]— a re only possible within the Modern episteme, so that its breakdown heralds, in Foucault’s famous phrase, “ the disappearance of man” [Foucault, p. 386].
Given this agenda, it might be surprising that Foucault begins his study with a long description and analysis of Las Meninas. Let’s examine his reasons for doing so.
Las Meninas is a remarkable painting for many reasons, but Foucault is drawn to it because it shows us an artist in the process of painting a picture whose subject or model is not included in the painting. This is because Velasquez’ painting only includes a portion of the reverse side of the canvas, thereby blocking our access to who the represented painter is painting. We viewers are standing in the place that would have been occupied by the person( s) the painter in the painting is painting. This gives our viewing of the painting an uncanny feeling. The fact that all the people in the p ainting— from the painter to the young princess and all of the assembled s ervants— are looking directly at the n on- r epresented, and perhaps n on- r epresentable, subject standing in the very place that we viewers occupy further enhances the uncanniness of the experience of viewing the painting.5
Foucault uses the painting and its elision of the subject of the represented painting to illustrate his claims about the Classical episteme. The painting is self- referential in so far as it is a painting about painting and the nature of representation. Its uniqueness is that very elision. Here is how Foucault describes the content of the painting:
Perhaps there exists, in this painting by Velàzquez, the representation as it were, of Classical representation, and the definition of the space it opens up to us. And, indeed, representation undertakes to represent itself here in all its elements…. This very subject… has been elided. And representation, freed finally from the relation that was impeding it, can offer itself as representation in its pure form.
[Foucault, 1970, pp. 17–18]
Philosophical
Works of Art
315
Despite its initial tentativeness, this passage lays out Foucault’s claims for the Velasquez painting:
that it displays the nature of representation in the Classical period including the problems that will
lead to its downfall, its inability to represent the subject of representation.6
The three philosophers I have discussed— N ietzsche, Heidegger, and Foucault— e ach use a
painting to explain a central idea in their philosophical theories. They clearly believe that works
of art can function to clarify philosophical ideas for those unfamiliar with them. In so doing, they
use these paintings in ways that might diverge from the intentions of the artists who painted them.
But this only supports the idea that art provides an important resource for the presentation and
elucidation of philosophical ideas and theories.
5 Modernist Art as Philosophy
The examples of artworks that have been discussed so far do not actually make an independent
contribution to philosophy but generally function as illustrations of philosophical ideas and theories.
I now turn to a group of works that can arguably be seen as advancing philosophical claims
and ideas. The works belong to the genre of Modernist art.
The theorist who first argued that works in this genre were philosophically significant was
Clement Greenberg. In “ Modernist Painting,” Greenberg characterizes Modernism as follows:
The essence of Modernism lies, as I see it, in the use of characteristic methods of a discipline
to criticize the discipline itself, not in order to subvert it but in order to entrench it more
firmly in its area of competence.
[Greenberg, 1966, 8]
How can actual paintings realize this Modernist perspective? To support his argument, Greenberg
relies on Gotthold Lessing’s contention in Laocoön ( 1962) that each art form is different from every
other one in virtue of their mediums. In order to realize the possibility of being a Modernist art
form, each form would have to rely only on those features of the medium that are unique to it.
Each art, it turned out, had to perform this demonstration [of the value and uniqueness afforded
by that art] on its own account. What had to be exhibited was not only that which was
unique and irreducible in art in general, but also that which was unique and irreducible in
each particular art… The task of self- c riticism became to eliminate from the specific effects
of each art any and every effect that might conceivably be borrowed from or by the medium
of any other art. Thus would each art be rendered ‘ pure’…”
[Greenberg, 1966, p. 1]
On this account, painting differs from other art forms in virtue of its mediums: a flat surface
that is usually rectangular though sometimes round and that is covered in colored pigments.
Manet is, for Greenberg, the first Modernist painter precisely because he rejects the illusionistic
space that had been essential to Western painting since the Renaissance. In works like Olympia
( 1863), while retaining a representational structure, Manet eschews the creation of a deep, receding
s pace— which painting shares, for example, with t heater— in favor of a shallow space that is
nearly identical with the plane of the canvas. (Olympia can be viewed at https:// m. musee- orsay.fr/
en/ works/ commentaire_id/ zoom/ olympia- 7087.html.) In this way, Manet created a painting that
emphasized the unique features of painting as an art form. It makes a significant contribution to
the philosophical understanding of painting by presenting the flatness of the canvas as the essential
feature of that art form.
Thomas
E. Wartenberg
316
Manet was not, of course, unique in his attempt to create a painting that relied on features that were unique to this art form. Greenberg’s praise for Abstract Expressionists like Jackson Pollock is derived from what he saw as their radicalization of Manet’s project, creating works that em-phasized the flatness of the painted surface and rejected any privileging of one area of the canvas over another.
The philosopher and art critic Arthur Danto applied Greenberg’s claims about the s elf- reflective nature of Modernist art to pop art. Danto saw Andy Warhol’s Brillo Box ( 1964) as a work of art that raised an important question about the nature of art. ( To view Brillo Box, go to https:// www.moma.org/ collection/ works/ 81384.) That work consists of a reproduction by Warhol of the card-board carton containing individual boxes of Brillo soap pads. Using plywood and silkscreen, Warhol created a box that was, according to Danto, visually indistinguishable from the ordinary cartons widely found in the storerooms of grocery stores of the time.
What impressed Danto was Brillo Box’s creative and insightful manner of posing the philosoph-ical question, “ What makes something a work of art?” Whereas previous philosophers had pro-posed a variety of answers to this q uestion— suggesting such notions as the accurate representation of reality, the conveying of an emotion, the use of significant form— none of them had seen that there was a deeper question: Why can one of two visually indistinguishable objects be a work of art while the other one is not?
Brillo Box raised this very question. It did so because it appeared to be visually indistinguishable from the ordinary grocers’ cartons of Brillo pads. And yet, it was clearly a work of art, something displayed in a gallery and destined for a museum, which any ordinary carton would not be. The work is Modernist precisely because it uses the traditional methods of sculpture— it is three- dimensional and has painted surfaces— i n order to raise questions about art, the sort of self- c ritical stance that Greenberg identified with Modernism.
Danto is clear that he takes Warhol to have produced works of art that are actually doing phi-losophy. As he says in his study of Warhol, “ Much of modern aesthetics is more or less a response to Warhol’s challenges, so in an important sense he really was doing philosophy by doing the art that made him famous” [Danto, 2009, p.135].
There are many other works of art, both paintings and sculptures, that fit the Greenbergian model for philosophical works of art. For example, Frank Stella challenged assumptions about the shape that a canvas had to have for it to be a painting. But rather than exploring more examples of such Modernist works, I turn now to a different type of philosophical artwork.
6 Illustrating Wittgenstein
Ludwig Wittgenstein is a philosopher who exerted a strong influence upon artists. There are varying explanations for this. One factor is certainly the aphoristic nature of his writing. Instead of having to work your way through a complex argument, you can get a sense of Wittgenstein’s ideas by reflecting on the meaning of such pithy, aphoristic statements as “ The world is all that is the case” [ Wittgenstein, 1961, §1]. And such statements can be used in an art work in a way that a lengthy philosophical argument cannot be. The question that we will be considering is whether the uses to which Wittgenstein’s ideas have been put by artists actually amount to doing philoso-phy through the visual arts.
I begin with a series of 12 screen prints made by the artist Eduardo Paolozzi during 1964 and 1965 entitled As Is When: A series of screen prints based on the life and writings of Ludwig Wittgenstein. Each of the prints has a separate title, often referring to Wittgenstein, and there are quotations from his writings and from Norman Malcolm’s memoir of Wittgenstein that are usually placed at the edges of the image. For example, to choose a work that refers to a famous idea of Witt-genstein’s, one print is called He Must, So To Speak, Throw Away the Ladder ( February 1965)
Philosophical Works of Art
317
(https://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/paolozzi-as-is-when-65450/6). The title is taken from
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Wittgenstein’s only published work. The quotation from that book
is given in English on the left edge of the print and in German on the right. It reads as follows in
translation, with the paragraph numbers eliminated in the print:
6.54 My propositions serve as elucidations in the following way: anyone who understands
me eventually recognizes them as nonsensical, when he has used t hem— a s steps— t o climb
up beyond them. ( He must, so to speak, throw away the ladder after he has climbed up it.)
He must transcend these propositions, and then he will see the world aright.
7 What we cannot speak about we must pass over in silence.
[Wittgenstein, 1961, p . 151]
Paolozzi’s silkscreen has no obvious relation to this passage. On a maroon background, there are
seven multi- colored irregular shapes that are reminiscent of ones from a jigsaw puzzle. They are
colored with bands of green, red, blue, purple, and orange. Perhaps the idea is that the various
propositions of the Tractatus are elements in a jigsaw puzzle that the reader/ viewer needs to assemble
and that, when they do so, the original propositions/ shapes will merge into a single cohesive
whole.
On such an interpretation, we can see the relationship between Wittgenstein’s text and
Paolozzi’s silkscreen. Yet, the silkscreen does not provide any rationale for or explanation of
Wittgenstein’s claim. This is not to say that Paolozzi was not deeply influenced by his reading
of Wittgenstein, only that his silkscreen does not make an independent contribution to the issue
Wittgenstein discusses. The same holds, I believe, for the 11 other silkscreens in this series, as
beautiful and intriguing as they are.
Bruce Nauman also was interested in Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations. In 1966 Nauman
took a sentence from that book and rendered it as an embossed bronze plaque that was
intended to be attached to a tree that would eventually cover it up. The sentence, “ A rose has no
teeth,” is used by Wittgenstein in contrast to sentences whose truth or falsity can be determined
empirically, such as “ A goose has no teeth” or “ a n ew- b orn child has no teeth” [Wittgenstein,
1953, II xi, p. 221]. While these latter two statements are true, it’s not at all clear what the statement
“ a rose has no teeth” means. After all, as Wittgenstein says, where would the teeth on a
rose be located? The sentence appears to be making a claim, but it is not at all clear what exactly
that claim is.
Nauman’s A Rose Has No Teeth (1966) (http://tonymay.net/works/other_content/sharkthorns3.
html) uses Wittgenstein’s sentence in order to criticize traditional sculpture. Despite being made
of l ead— a material known for its density and maleability— t he work is meant to be covered over
by the natural growth of the tree to which it is attached. Clearly, then, the work suggests a contrast
between natural things and works of art. But whether it does anything to clarify Wittgenstein’s
claim about the statement itself seems doubtful.
Jasper Johns made a number of lithographs that include the image made famous by Wittgenstein
of a duck- r abbit. This image is one that Wittgenstein uses as part of his discussion of what
he terms “ aspect seeing” [1953, II, xi, p. 193]. Wittgenstein wants readers to see that certain visual
images— of the duck- rabbit in this case— are ambiguous and can be seen now as this and now as
that. The same visual image can be interpreted in different ways: “ But we can also see the illustration
now as one thing now as another. – So we interpret it, and see it as we interpret it” [1953, II,
xi, p . 193]. This discussion of the relationship between image and interpretation is one that clearly
has significance for a visual artist.
It’s not exactly a surprise that Johns reproduces a version of the image Wittgenstein used [1953, II,
xi, p. 194], though he places it in contexts that are more specific than Wittgenstein’s line- drawing.
Thomas
E. Wartenberg
318
For example, in his Rabbit/Duck(1990)(https://www.incollect.com/listings/photos-prints/prints/ jasper-johns-rabbit-duck-168136), Johns places the image of the duck-rabbit drawn on a pink piece of fabric that is depicted as tacked onto an abstract image of swirling b lue- black and white that is similar to other works by Johns.
Placed in the context of this work, Johns seems to be suggesting that what Wittgenstein called “ aspect seeing”— now it’s a duck, then it’s a rabbit— is part and parcel of how we view art. When we look at the cloth with the d uck- rabbit on it, we try to see it as an object represented by Johns, but the attempt keeps collapsing as we see the background as a flat abstract work. So, Johns could be using an image taken from Wittgenstein to make a work that is about the nature of art itself, a frequent topic in Modernist art as we saw in the last section.
Joseph Kosuth created works that demonstrate a deep philosophical engagement with Witt-genstein’s ideas. Consider, for example, 276. On Color Blue ( 1990) ( accessible at https:// www.skny.com/news-and-events/joseph-kosuth-in-infinite-blue).7 The work consists of neon tubing that emits blue light and that is formed into a quotation from the Philosophical Investigations:
‘ But don’t we at least mean something quite definite when we look at a color and name our color impression?’ It is as if we detached the color impression from the object like a mem-brane. ( This ought to arouse our suspicions.)
[Wittgenstein, 1953, §276]8
In the previous paragraph, Wittgenstein had been criticizing the philosophical temptation to treat color words like “ blue” as referring to our private “ inner sensations.” His undermining of this sug-gestion is part of the so- c alled “ private language argument” in which he is said to contest the idea that there could be such a thing as a language that was limited to one speaker, or that the primary referent of linguistic terms like “ blue” is our private inner experience of the color. He states that, when you look at the blue of the sky, “ the idea never crosses your mind that this impression of color belongs only to you” ( Wittgenstein, 1953, §276). On Color Blue certainly presents us with a version of the experience that Wittgenstein alludes to in his thought experiment and thus can be seen as an attempt to support his position about color words not referring to private internal sensations.
The passage that forms Kosuth’s work begins with the interlocutor responding to Wittgen-stein’s claim. He still maintains, albeit quite vaguely, that there must be something to the idea of color sensations. To which Wittgenstein responds by saying that would be like treating a color as if it were a skin that could be detached from the object and that doesn’t make sense.
But would it make sense to see Kosuth’s neon sculpture as presenting us with the color blue detached from any physical object? It’s true that the words from Philosophical Investigations that are present in the work are created by the blue neon tubes, but there are no “ objects” to which the blue attaches. Hasn’t Kosuth created a work that problematizes the notion of colors in a manner analogous to what Wittgenstein does in the passage that forms the work? If so, then he has pro-duced an independent means for assessing Wittgenstein’s claim.
The artist whose engagement with Wittgenstein yields the philosophically most substantial works is Mel Bochner. His aim is to use visual means to support some of the claims that Witt-genstein makes in his posthumously published work, On Certainty ( 1969). The works in which Bochner attempts this are not just the twelve Wittgenstein Illustrations ( 1971) but also the various Range Drawings ( 1 973– 1 979). I will focus on Fourth Range(1973) (http://www.melbochner.net/archive/ 1970s/) to illustrate the unique nature of Bochner’s achievement.9
As the title On Certainty suggests, Wittgenstein is interested in the question of whether we can know anything with certainty. This issue has dogged modern Western philosophy since the time of Descartes. In his Meditations on First Philosophy, Descartes opens his investigation by arguing
Philosophical
Works of Art
319
that we cannot know with certainty that any of our occurrent beliefs are true, so that we should
reject all of them as doubtful.
Wittgenstein’s response to this skeptical argument relies on the idea that the notion of deception
or doubt is being used improperly: “ One gives oneself a false picture of doubt,” he tells us
[Wittgenstein, 1969, §249]. The move from doubting a specific perceptual report— “ The person
across the quad is Jaime”, for example— to doubting the senses as a whole— “ We have no reason
to believe in the existence of an external world”— i s simply illegitimate. “ A doubt that doubted
everything would not be a doubt.” [Wittgenstein, 1969, §450]
Wittgenstein’s claim, one that bears similarity to the ideas of the pragmatists, is that doubt only
arises in specific situations. Universalizing the doubt that arises in a specific situation into a generalized
doubt of everything, as Descartes does, is an error, Wittgenstein maintains. The reason
that Wittgenstein gives to justify his claim that hyperbolic doubt is not possible is that something
can be judged to be a mistake, an error, only in the context of a rule.
Bochner sets out to demonstrate the validity of Wittgenstein’s argument by creating what we
might call an original “ number game” on analogy with the Wittgensteinian notion of a language
game. A careful investigation of Fourth Range reveals that the image was created by applying a set
of rules that specify how number should be arranged on the paper, its “ syntax” in Wittgensteinian
terms. The numerals from 0 to 9 are written in a vertical sequence with all the numerals written
in red. At the end of the sequence, the sequence is repeated again, only this time the color is
changed to black. This alternating sequence continues until the end of the column is reached. At
this point, the sequence continues at the top of the page, but the color changes mid- s equence. This
continues until a point is reached where the final numeral in a column is 9. A new “ block” begins
with a new sequence of numerals. ( I’m simplifying a little here. For a more complete discussion
see my [2023].)
So far so good. But a careful observation of Fourth Range reveals the presence of an “ error.” In
the fifth column of the fourth block, the black sequence above the final red one ends with an 8
and not a 9 ( see illustration 31.2).
This counts as a mistake because it violates the rules used to create the work— its “ grammar.”
Only by becoming aware of the implicit grammatical rules for constructing Fourth Range, can a
viewer recognize the 8 as the error it is.
The reason that Bochner’s work moves beyond the others equally indebted to Wittgenstein’s
thought is that it provides an independent ground for accepting Wittgenstein’s criticism of Cartesian
skepticism. Wittgenstein argues that the skeptic misuses the notion of doubt and Bochner’s
piece shows us exactly why Wittgenstein is correct to assert that doubt only arises in specific
contexts, so that the hyperbolic doubt necessary for skepticism involves a misunderstanding of the
grammar of “ doubt.”
This examination of works of art indebted to Wittgenstein shows the range of significance such
pieces have. Although some of them merely call attention to the ideas of the great philosopher,
others provide insights into his views and even support his claims. A work of art can qualify as
doing philosophy when it provides independent support for a view articulated by a philosopher
such as Wittgenstein.
7 Conclusion
The goal of this chapter has been to explore a variety of ways in which visual art has been used—
by artists, professors, and philosophers— t o connect with philosophical claims and theories. We
have seen a variety of different mediums— engravings, paintings, sculptures— employed in the
attempt to illustrate philosophical ideas and theories. A few of the works I have discussed move
Thomas E. Wartenberg
320
beyond illustrating a philosophical claim or theory to actually making a distinct and distinctive contribution to the field of philosophy.
I make no claims to this chapter being an exhaustive survey of philosophical paintings and sculptures. Rather, it is intended to mark out territory that calls out for further development by philosophers and art critics. More than that, it shows that philosophers, art critics, and artists themselves have seen visual art as a way of addressing the very philosophical concerns that animate the canonical texts of philosophers from Aristotle to Wittgenstein.10
Notes
1 See Wartenberg ( 2007) for a discussion of film as a source of philosophical insight and knowledge and Nussbaum ( 1992) for one about literature.
2 I want to thank Alexander George and Joe Moore for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this chapter.
3 Van Gogh painted a number of paintings of shoes. The one that Heidegger is referring to is presumably the one now in the college of the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, https:// www.vangoghmuseum.nl/ en/ collection/ s0011V1962?v=1. Heidegger’s interpretation was challenged by Meyer Schapiro in a series of articles. See Shapiro ( 1968).
4 Foucault’s most extensive discussion of a visual artist is his book on the surrealist painter René Magritte, This Is Not a Pipe.
5 Foucault does not discuss an important element of the painting: the inclusion of a small mirror on the back wall showing the presence of the actual subjects of the painting, the king and queen.
6 For an interpretation of Las Meninas that contradicts Foucault’s, see Svetlana Alpers, “ Interpretation without Representation,” Representations, 1, 30–42.
7 Different instances of the work have different dates. 1990 is the earliest and 1993 the latest I could find.
8 I have inserted the quotation marks that are in the German text but were omitted from the English translation.
9 Limitations of space prohibit me from discussion the actual Wittgenstein Illustrations themselves. But see Wartenberg ( 2015) for a discussion of them that highlights their philosophical implications.
10 For a more complete discussion of philosophical works of art, see Wartenberg ( 2023).
References
Berger, Susanna. 2017. The Art of Philosophy: Visual Thinking in Europe from the Late Renaissance to the Early Enlightenment. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Danto, Arthur. 1964. “ The Artworld,” The Journal of Philosophy,61.9, pp. 571–584.
———. 2009. Andy Warhol. New Haven: Yale University Press.Foucault, Michel. 1970. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. New York: Random House.
Greenberg, Clement. 1966. “M odernist Painting,” in Gregory Battcock ( ed.), The New Art: A Critical Anthol-ogy, Accessed on April 19 from http:// www.yorku.ca/ yamlau/ readings/ greenberg_modernistPainting.pdf. Pages will refer to the online edition.
Heidegger, Martin. 2002. Off the Beaten Track, Julian Young and Kenneth Haynes, eds. Cambridge: Cam-bridge University Press.
Hobbes, Thomas. 1651. Leviathan. London: Andrew Crooke.
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim. 1962. Laocoön: An Essay on the Limits of Painting and Poetry. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1999. The Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings, Raymond Geuss ( ed.), Cambridge: Cam-bridge University Press.
Nussbaum, Martha. 1992. Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature, Revised Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. 1979. Emile or On Education, Harold Bloom, trans. New York: Basic Books.
Schapiro, Meyer. 1968. “ The Still Life as a Personal O bject— A N ote on Heidegger and van Gogh,” in M.L. Simmel (ed.), The Reach of Mind. Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer.
Wartenberg, Thomas E. 2007. Thinking on Screen: Film as Philosophy. Abingdon: Routledge.
Philosophical
Works of Art
321
———. 2015. Mel Bochner: Illustrating Philosophy. South Hadley: Mount Holyoke College Museum of Art.
———. 2023. Thoughtful Images: Illustrating Philosophy Through Art. New York and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. New York: The MacMillan Company.
———. 1961. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
———. 1969. On Certainty. London: Basil Blackwell.
322
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-39
32
PITTURA
A Gendered Template for Painting
Peg Brand Weiser
Why is painting unique among the visual arts? And why in the late 16th century did Cesare Ripa
in his landmark Iconologia choose to create a distinctly female template for the act of painting?
Moreover, why would a woman ever choose to paint herself as La Pittura ( The Allegory of Painting)?1
This essay will offer the thoughts of a p ainter- philosopher on the historic significance of the
choice of topic, iconography, and gender of the most recognized allegory of painting, namely
the original textual description of the Italian writer Cesare Ripa on Pittura ( 1593) which was
later illustrated by various artists ( 1603 and following). Subsequent versions of Ripa’s Iconologia
were published by French, Dutch, and British translators. Artists and writers kept copies on hand
for reference. It remained wildly popular and influential until the 19th century when art critic
and historian Johann Joachim Winckelmann derided Ripa’s allegories as “ virtually useless” and
published a rival work ( Zimmermann 1995: 19). Through numerous editions, collaborative illustrators
may have changed or embellished the template but they consistently depicted Pittura as a
woman, pictured with symbolic attributes of an artist, faithful to Ripa’s initial description.
The allegorizing of painting as a female artist plays an important role in legitimizing and
valorizing actual s elf- portraits by women in ancient Greece and Rome, the Renaissance, and
thereafter, leading to issues that involve identity and agency. I will argue that in a patriarchal
art world that minimized women’s accomplishments, ( 1) the valorizing of Pittura served to encourage
women to paint and to portray themselves in art; ( 2) painting oneself as Pittura elevated
an artist and her creative work to an iconic and allegorical level equal to male artists who were
denied such self-representation; and (3) the valorizing of painting-as-allegory prioritized the
physical action of painting and served to elevate a mode of creating that facilitated women’s
agency. The history of painting reveals ancient roots of gendered creativity as recorded by Pliny
the Elder, Ripa’s influential publication in 1593, and high levels of achievement by at least one
notable Baroque artist in contrast to a diminishing of women’s influence in favor of men’s art: a
norm that has internalized male privilege and power for centuries. Yet painting remains a medium
that emphasizes women’s talents, particularly as they are embodied in the depiction of the
allegorical female figure, Pittura.
1 History of Women Painting/ Portraiture
It is well- documented that artistically productive women were routinely dismissed as irrational,
emotional, and incapable of serious creative output. Decades of feminist art history have chronicled
their struggle ( Borzello 1998; Chadwick 1990; Cheney, Faxon and Russo 2000). As far back
Pittura:
A Gendered Template for Painting
323
as 1971, the late art historian Linda Nochlin authored the pivotal essay entitled, “ Why have there
been no great women artists?” to unearth the elusive reasons for the paucity of female artists in
standard art history texts, museum collections, and general art discourse ( Nochlin and Grant 2021).
In spite of centuries of challenge to their credibility, many women prevailed in producing images
and artworks, including self- p ortraits ( Higgie 2021; Redeal, Chadwick and Borzello, 2002).
Although the first documented male self- portrait has been dated to 1300 BC in Egypt, “ no examples
from early antiquity have survived that can be identified with certitude as s elf- p ortraiture”
of women until the Hellenistic era ( 4 00– 3 15 BC) that include records of women artists and their
self- portraits ( Cheney, Faxon and Russo 2000: 1). A mural painting from a Roman villa at Herculaneum
dating before the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79 pictured “ Marcia in Her Studio”
seated in front of two female pupils, painting a male statue, complete with palette in her left hand
and paintbrush in her right ( Cheney, Faxon and Russo 2000: 11). In the 12th century, Claricia
playfully drew herself hanging from the bottom of the letter Q in a German psalter from Augsburg
( Borzello 1998: 21). Numerous miniatures from an early 15th century French translation of
Boccaccio’s Concerning Famous Women ( alternately titled, Noble and Famous Women) often posed a
woman surrounded by painting implements, seated at a work desk, looking into a circular mirror
positioned to the left of the panel on which she painted ( Borzello 1998: 20). One example from a
1470 edition of Boccaccio’s Noble and Famous Women even provided an updated version of “ Marcia
Painting Her S elf- Portrait in her Atelier” ( Cheney, Faxon and Russo 2000: 11). What inspired
these women to depict themselves as artists?
The writings of Pliny the Elder play an essential role in understanding their history. In his
1st-century AD work, Naturalis Historiae ( Natural History), Book 35, on the history of art, Pliny
recorded the names of women famous in both the visual arts and in poetry based on considerable
evidence; most were allegedly married, trained by their fathers who were artists, maintained an
academy- l ike following of students, and created s elf- p ortraits ( Cheney, Faxon and Russo 2000:
7). They used a type of encaustic p aint— p owdered colored pigment mixed with hot wax applied
with an iron knife or a type of s poon- p alette— o n linen, wooden panel, or ivory by means of several
tedious and costly techniques. Not until the 5th century BC was color applied with a brush
(penicillo) to a painting that rested on an easel, facilitating the process. An early S- curve of the
painted human figure was attributed to Aristarete of Calypso, a well- k nown and famed Athenian
painter during the end of the 3rd century BC. The subject matter of her work entitled, “ A Mother
Assisting Her Daughter’s Toilet,” helped popularize a theme derived from sculpted depictions of
the goddess Venus at her toilet while allowing her the opportunity to include herself in the scene
( Cheney, Faxon and Russo 2000: 7 – 8).
The female artists of Pliny’s text were said to successfully work under the royal patronage of
Alexander the Great creating portraits, mythological scenes, and genre paintings for the court.
Importantly, his account confined women’s artistic production in antiquity to painting, excluding
sculpture: “ probably because it was less heavy work than casting in bronze, carving in marble or
modeling in clay” ( Cheney, Faxon and Russo 2000: 9). One woman in particular, Athenagoras
Kora of Sicyonia ( or Callirhoë), was said to have played a pivotal role in the development of portraiture
as a genre as far back as the 7th century BC. With a piece of coal, she sketched a profile
of her lover’s face that cast a shadow upon the wall, as he prepared to leave for war. Her father, a
potter named Dibutades, filled in the outline with clay, thus creating the first b as- r elief ( Cheney,
Faxon and Russo 2000: 10). Pliny considered this to be the first portrait, indeed one created by a
woman, as he outlined two types of artistic creativity: intuitive or invention, as with the original coal
sketch created by Kora, and reasoned or mimetic which he considered imitation, as of that executed
by her father ( Cheney, Faxon and Russo 2000: 10– 11). This distinction, particularly the role of
imitation, is essential to Ripa’s characterization of Pittura 22 centuries later and recalls the early
aesthetic nuances of imitation elaborated upon by Plato in his many writings as well. It is clear
Peg
Brand Weiser
324
that the writings of Pliny written six centuries after Plato’s dialogues in The Republic established
two clear trends: first, painting was the primary— perhaps the only— medium utilized by women
in the ancient world of artistic production, and second, legend held that a woman created the
first portrait in an intuitive and inventive, i.e., non- imitative act of creativity. The first accords
high status to painting, whereas the second accords high status to a woman. Let us look at how painting— the act of painting and the painting of women’s ( self- ) portraits by women became elevated to the allegorical figure of Pittura and enshrined through at least nine Italian editions, eight non- Italian (French, Dutch, and English), as well as an Austrian, Russian, and even a Slavonic
edition (Zimmermann, 1995: 20).
2 Cesare Ripa’s Iconologia (1593; 1603; 1618)
Cesare Ripa was born c. 1555 in Perugia, knighted by Pope Clement VIII in 1598, and died January 22, 1622 in Rome. While working in his thirties as a cook and a butler, referred to more specifically as a trinciante— one who carved meat for important guests at meals— or a major- domo to
the household of Cardinal Anton Maria Salviati (died 1602), he wrote Iconologia in his spare time
and dedicated it to his employer (McGrath 2003/2010: 1; Venable 2008: 16). According to Hans- Joachim Zimmermann who has written extensively on Ripa’s enormous impact on writers, poets,
and artists, “Ripa wanted to offer not just a heap of somewhat broken images but a description
and explanation of universal pictures which were accessible to any educated man” (Zimmermann
1995: 17). These “universal pictures”— or as they were later called “moral emblems” in the first
English translation by Tempest Pierce in 1709— were derived from classical sources— Egyptian,
Greek, Roman— as well as bestiaries and fairy tales or simply created from his imagination.
The original slim octavo (unillustrated) volume published in 1593 was titled, Iconologia: ouero, Descrittione di diuerse imagini cauate dall’antichità, & di propria inuentione (Iconology: Wherein are Express’d, Various Images of Virtues, Vices, Passions, Arts, Humours, Elements and Celestial Bodies) (Ripa 1593). The title page noted the volume’s usefulness for “Orators, Poets, Painters, Sculptors, and all Lovers of Ingenuity.” All entries— such as strength, eloquence, magnanimity, despair, friendship— were listed alphabetically. The illustrated 1603 version “became the standard handbook throughout Europe until the end of the 18th century” (Ripa 1603a; Zimmermann 1995: 17)). Ripa’s Introduction, “Where in general is treated of diverse forms of figures with their ground Rules,” explains the conceptualizing of the terms, highlighting the number of human figures— male, female, child— that use the “Art
of painting” to convey “essential” natures adapted from figures of both the gods and man (Ripa 1603b: British Library Ms. 3). From the beginning, the creative act of painting becomes codified, indeed allegorized as a woman in an uplifting and enduring way, affecting artists of both genders differently for centuries to come. Why is Pittura cast as female? According to one scholar, “Because abstract concepts were gendered feminine in Latin and Greek, humanists represented allegorical personifications such as ‘Painting’ as a woman” (Woodall 2005: 26–
27). But some terms such as Soccorso (Rescue, Relief), Peccato (Pity, Sin, Shame), and Zelo (Zeal) are gendered masculine and represented as male figures beginning in 1603. The overwhelming number, however, is gendered feminine. Painting (pictured on the left of the 1603 frontispiece) is creatively contrasted to Poetry, also feminine, and conceptualized—as elaborated below—in terms of similarities and overlapping natures of Beauty, Art, and Perfection ( Figure 32.1).
One interesting figure to study before proceeding to Pittura within the text is the concept and figure of Bellezza (Beauty) mentioned in the Introduction and found on page 41 of the 1603 text. Since many other feminine figures begin with the descriptor, “A
beautiful woman,” it is important to know how Ripa characterized both the concept of beauty as well as a human figure representing beauty. His creative imagination does not disappoint as he writes, “Wherefore we have painted beauty, in her place, with her head in the clouds and with other
Pittura: A Gendered Template for Painting
325
fitting circumstances” in order to capture her “essential qualifications” (Ripa 1603b: British Library Ms. 7) (Figure 32.2).
The visual challenge is palpable as Ripa continues in his attempt to qualify how she looks. He
makes analogies to other terms, e.g., despair is depicted by one who hangs himself by the throat
while delight, pleasure, and mirth “must be painted beautiful, wanton, fresh colored and laughing” (Ripa 1603b: British Library Ms. 7). The difficulty with painting Beauty is her unchangeableness, splendor, and perfection. Ripa’s figure attempts to “depict an unknown, by a less known
thing: as if we would light a candle to behold the sun directly, so that the figure should have no
likeness which is yet the soul of it” (Ripa 1603b: British Library Ms. 7). In the text itself, a nude
Bellezza is gendered female, tilts with classical contrapposto stance, holds a lily that represents
female charm with one hand and a ball and a compass in the other “to
demonstrate that all beauty
consists of measures and proportions, which are adjusted with time” (Ripa [1593]: 1764– 1767).
(One
scholar claims that the first illustrator of the 1603 version failed to follow Ripa’s entry and
incorrectly depicted her naked, in conformity with more typical Renaissance practice (McGrath
[2003] 2010: 1.) The 16th- century Renaissance ideal of beauty was inherited from Plato, the Neoplatonists, Vasari, and others and involved a female figureFigure 32.1 Cesare Ripa, frontispiece of Iconologia, 1603 edition
Peg Brand Weiser
326
Figure
32.2 Cesare Ripa, “ Bellezza,” 1603 version
Characterized by a deportment that is erect and composed, with any curves or bends confined
to the movement of the arms... a kind of movement that combined the gentlest appearance of
animation and life with a simplicity indicative of inner virtue.
(Fermor: 128)
Beauty’s head is in the clouds because beauty is difficult to define but clearly, artists did not follow
this suggestion from Ripa, since beauty is not normally depicted as such. Her essence is an inner
virtue composed of grace, modesty, nobility, and charm, according to Firenzuola’s Dialogue on
the Beauties of Women from 1541. Her beauty comes from a “‘ mysterious’ order in Nature that the
human intellect cannot begin to fathom” ( Cole: 128). Ripa justifies how Bellezza is depicted and
adds a comment about one’s personal reward at the end of the contemplative process:
To make then, the likeness and action, what in every object is fittest and becoming, we shall
take notice of what the Rhetorici or orators warn us: vis, that by known things we must seek
the high t hings—b y Laudible, the Illustrious; by despised, the foul or base; by commendable,
the splendorous. From which things, every one will see such a multitude of imaginations
increase in his understanding, if he be not too stupid.
( Ripa 1603b: British Library Ms. 7–8 )
By making numerous virtues (s uch as beauty), vices, passions, arts, and so forth, available to the
public in his published Iconologia, therefore, Ripa’s “ universal pictures” are accessible by everyone
with active and intelligent imaginations. Moreover, one learns about the ineffability of beauty, increasing
one’s understanding of her power and potential, and why other female figures such as Pittura
are often described first as “ a beautiful woman” before Ripa continues with particular traits.
Pittura: A Gendered Template for Painting
327
Ripa provided a vivid textual description of Pittura but in neither of his first two editions did
he offer an internal illustration, not even in the second edition of 1603 which was published with
684 concepts and 150 woodcuts. Here is what Ripa deemed the “ universal picture” of Pittura:
Woman, beautiful, with black hair, and thick, scattered, and twisted in various ways, with
arched eyelashes, showing fantastic thoughts; cover the mouth with a band tied behind the ears,
with a gold chain around the neck, from which a Mask hangs, and has Imitatio written on her
forehead. She will hold the Brush in one hand, and in the other the panel, with the iridescent
cloth covering her feet, and at the foot of it some instruments of Painting can be made, to show
that Painting is a noble exercise, not being able to do without much application of the intellect.
(Ripa [1593] 1764–1767)
Ripa goes on to say that all of the professions, i.e., the arts, rely upon intellect but in different
ways. For instance, poetry demands more of its practitioners in terms of intellect by which we
“ see” through reason and words whereas painting imitates nature through deception, making one
see or “ understand” through the senses. Painters need to imitate real things utilizing their imagination
and if the imitations embody beauty, they become noble, aspire towards perfection, and
provide pleasure. When attending to a “ subtle investigation of minimal things in themselves,” the
Painter “ easily acquires wonder and melancholy;” wonder is indicated by the arched eyebrows and
melancholy is defined as a vague, calm, and sometimes sweet sadness (Ripa [1593] 1764–1767). For
Ripa, the “ good Painter” is continuously thinking imaginatively about nature, as evidenced even
by the artist’s hair described in detail as
hirsuti, and scattered overhead, and in different parts, with rings, which appear to be produced
by neglect, because these arise externally from the head, as inside thoughts are born,
and ghosts, which are means as to speculation, so again to material works.
(Ripa [1593]: 1764–1767)
Consider another translation offered by curators of the British Royal Collection, slightly different
from above:
A beautiful woman, with full black hair, disheveled, and twisted in various ways, with arched
eyebrows that show imaginative thought, the mouth covered with a cloth tied behind her
ears, with a chain of gold at her throat from which hangs a mask, and has written in front
‘ imitation.’ She holds in her hand a brush, and in the other the palette, with clothes of evanescently
covered drapery.
( Whitaker, Clayton and Loconte 2007: 301)
In both versions, Ripa retains an essential element of “ fantastic thoughts” or “ imaginative
thought” for P ittura— clearly an extension of Pliny’s notion of “ intuitive” and “ inventive,”
i.e., a non- imitative, creative act— but then insists on a hanging mask with an inscription of
the word “ imitation.” It is not always clear, however, where the word “ imitation” should appear.
One suggestion is that “ Ripa advised that mute Pittura should have the word IMITATIO
inscribed on her forehead” while the hanging medallion represents the traditional pendant
awarded by the royal patron ( Woodall 2005: 27). The disheveled hair of the female artist
invokes the n on- reasoned mode of artistic creativity that separated daughter from ( reasoned)
father in the ancient Pliny myth; we are reminded of Plato’s insistence on divine inspiration in
The Ion that strikes a similar note that was often repeated by the N eo- Platonists in 15th- century
Florence.
Peg
Brand Weiser
328
In accordance with the ancient distinction between art and poetry, as Larry Shiner observes, we see “a
gagged mouth symbolizing the ancient saying that painting is ‘mute poetry’” (Shiner 2001: 57). Painting is opposed to the oral act of reciting poetry since Poesia is another allegorical figure visually offered to us by Ripa. She is depicted in splendid raiments, covered with stars, accompanied by a long slender horn and a stringed instrument like a cello (Figure 32.3). She may be accompanied by three winged children who present the instruments to her and represent pastoral, lyric, and heroic poetry. She clearly appears, opposite Pittura on the frontispiece of the Dutch version of Iconologia (below), assuming main stage position in the 1644 translation.
It is worth noting that there is no entry for Sculpture in Ripa’s original or subsequent editions. However, the term appears in the 18th- century translation of Abbot Cesare Orlandi ( 1764– 1767) and is gendered masculine: a young man, beautiful with a simple headdress, a pleasant but not ornate face, who is, like Painting, consumed with thoughts of nature and its imitation. Orlandi includes a sense of touch to describe sculpture, by way of arguing that sculpture is both the object of the “Eye” and tactile experience. The work of Michelangelo Buonarroti is cited and Orlandi adds that painting is the superior art form over sculpture “in
that which belongs to the eye for the use of colors, lights, and shadows” (Ripa [1593] 1764– 1767). Perhaps Ripa did not include a description of sculpture in his late 16th and early 17th- century versions of Iconologia in order to feature Painting as superior, particularly as he often cited the use of colors for effect and emphasized certain colors chosen for symbolic meaning even in his first unillustrated edition of 1593. Pittura wore “iridescent cloth” while Poesia was “dressed in celestial blue, over which there will be many stars” (Ripa [1593] 1764– 1767).
3 1644 Dutch Translation by Dirck Pietersz
The 1644 Dutch version of Iconologia translated by Dirck Pietersz with 196 engravings by Christoph Jegher includes two that follow Ripa’s directions to the letter (Ripa [1593] 1644) ( Figure 32.4).Figure 32.3 Cesare Ripa, “Poesia,” 1603 version
Pittura: A Gendered Template for Painting
329
F igure 32.4 C esare Ripa’s Iconologia of Uytbeeldinghen des Verstants, vertaald door Dirck Pietersz. Pers, Amsterdam
1644
This visual template of Pittura on the right of the frontispiece embodies the qualities Ripa laid
down: a beautiful woman, mouth covered, painting tools in hand, ample flowing gown, wearing
a human mask around her neck. We do not see disheveled hair, however, and we might question
whether her arched eyebrows hint at or indeed “ show imaginative thought.” Even her depiction
as “ a beautiful woman” is suspect, at least to our eyes in the 21st century, as her legs seem more
appropriate to a Roman soldier or the sculpted “ Michelangelesque” figure of Night adorning the
16th-c entury Medici tomb in the Church of San Lorenzo in Florence (N elson 2002: 469). The influence
of Michelangelo, who expanded both the range of body types and the ideals of physical female
beauty, is clearly on display, once we appreciate the largesse of Jegher’s Pittura (F igure 32.5).
Michelangelo’s use of enhanced musculature in marble is but one way he depicted the ideal
beauty of women; “ Michelangelo aimed to go beyond nature, and in doing so, he helped create a
Peg Brand Weiser
330
Figure
32.5 Christoph Jegher. Detail of 1644 frontispiece
new way to show female ( and male) figures. This type of powerful woman reveals the artist’s great
imagination” ( Nelson 2002: 468). We know from the artist’s writings that the figure of Night—
n ude and reclining— was meant to embody not only the end of day but also the passing of time,
aging, and death. Given that two Medici dukes are buried in the tomb, the artist sought to depict
the cycle of life by completing the series of sculptures in addition to Night with the contrasting
male figure of Day and the youthful, female Dawn and its contrasting male figure Dusk. One contemporary
commented that artworks “ made by Michelangelo compete with nature and reality;
they seem to strive to be of equal or even superior beauty” (N elson 2002: 468). His influence on
succeeding artists was considerable; at least two 1 6th-c entury artists testified to his mastery of
female norms of beauty. One sculptor, Giovan Francesco Susini created measured drawings—
representing Night as standing— so that other artists could study and copy her proportions and another,
Giovanni Paolo Lomazzo, wrote down criteria for a range of female body types referred to
as Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian ( Nelson 2002: 469). Whereas the elongated, feminine, sexualized
beauty of the Corinthian “t ype” was associated with the ancient goddess Venus, the “ solid” Doric
type “ could be used for both men and women, expressing ‘ great severity and presence’... and thus
should be used for representations of Mother Earth or of Sibyls” (N elson 2002: 469). Lomazzo
Pittura: A Gendered Template for Painting
331
specifically referred to Night as Doric, thus casting her as a paradigm of strength, skill, and knowledge:
one of “ those special women, like warriors and hunters, or matrons or other severe women”
( Nelson 2002: 468). Similarly, Jegher’s Pittura as influenced by Michaelangelo’s Doric body type
and strong character is definitely in control of her craft, caught in the act of painting, in her studio
amidst canvases. We cannot see what is on her easel and in fact, she does not appear within the
printed volume itself; rather her importance lands her opposite Poesia on the frontispiece to represent
the visual, unwritten arts versus that of the written.
Once viewers understand the stylistic context of why Pittura looks so muscular, we might
surmise that the m asculine- l ooking beauty of Pittura is anti- f eminine, butch, or perhaps more
representative of an extreme Doric body type. If so, this expands the range of ideal beauty options
even more than Michelangelo may have intended although to describe the Doric type of body for
both men and women invites a comfortable gender fluidity in bodily depiction. Looking back to
the way beauty was originally personified— pictured nude, radiant, with her head in the c louds—
is helpful at this juncture. Since “ beauty” was basically left undefined and open- ended, with Ripa
explicitly endorsing imaginative speculation by encouraging multiple representations of beauty,
those large, muscular female artists exhibiting inner strength and resolve of the 1644 woodcut version
of Pittura can qualify as examples of Ripa’s original notion of “ imaginative thought.” Pittura
again stands next to Poesia; together they represent the major arts.
4 Iconologia, or Moral Emblems translated by Tempest Pierce. 1709
Consider three other depictions, not of Pittura herself who is missing from the 1709 ( first) English
translation by Tempest Pierce entitled, Iconologia, or Moral Emblems, that contains a total of 326 figures
but rather of the related figures Art, Beauty, and Perfection ( Ripa [1593] 1709). The figures in
Pierce’s translation were attributable to several artists, each of which employed a motif of “ etched
oval medallions in the style of late 17th- c entury mannerism... highly original and well executed”
but based loosely on woodcuts in an Italian Ripa edition ( Zimmermann 1995: 22) ( Figure 32.6).
Art ( Emblem 28) is described by Pierce in much the way Pittura was originally cast: standing,
fully clothed, holding the tools of her trade, with ample, flowing drapery.
An agreeable Woman, seems to be ingenious by her very Looks, in a green Gown; in her right
Hand a Hammer, an engraving Tool, and a Pencil; holding in her left Hand, a Stake that
supports a Vine.
Figure
32.6 Cesare Ripa, Iconologia, or Moral Emblems. Tempest Pierce edition. London, 1709
Peg Brand Weiser
332
The agreeable Countenance declares the Charms of Art, attracting all Eyes upon it, and
causing the author to be approv’d and commended. The three instruments are for intimating
Nature.
( Ripa [1593] 1709: 7)
She is not, however, called beautiful but rather only “ an agreeable woman” who “ seems to be ingenious
by her very Looks” even though she is shown with her back to us. What is intimated by our
translator, Tempest Pierce, is that what we see does not necessarily guarantee who she is since she
only seems to be ingenious but possibly, is not. Moreover, she is merely “ ingenious”— resourceful
and c unning— n ot replete with fantastic or imaginative thoughts as she once was. Further suspicion
is cast upon Art because her agreeable c ountenance— h ow she looks, not necessarily her true,
essential nature— is tied to neither skill nor strength but rather to “ the Charms of Art,” whatever
those powers might be. Her stature has diminished considerably since 1644 when Jegher’s depiction
of her followed Michelangelo’s dictates of both ample Doric proportions and inner strength
of character, determination, and skill.
Also depicted is Beauty (37) who is once again depicted nude and radiant as in Ripa’s 1603
edition but in this translation, beauty serves no purpose for art or perfection since neither figure
is described as beautiful:
A lady hiding her Head in the Clouds, and the rest of her Body is scarce visible, by reason of
the Splendour that environs her. She stretches one Hand out of the Light, with a Lilly, and
holds out a Ball and Compass with the other.
Her Head in the Clouds shows that nothing is more impossible to be declar’d, nor thing less
known, being a Ray of Divinity. The Lilly denotes Beauty, the Ball and Compass denote that
Beauty consists in Measure and Proportion. The Flower moves the Senses, and recreates the Spirits;
so does Love move the Soul to Enjoyment.
( Ripa [1593] 1709: 10)
And finally, Perfection ( Emblem 239) emphasizes the importance of measurements and the perfect
form, the circle, but like Art, fails to exhibit beauty and in effect, becomes a servant to others, a
nurturer:
A fair lady, in a Vest of Gold Gauze; her Bosom is unveil’d; her Body is in the Zodias; her
Sleeves turn’d up to the Elbow, making a perfect Circle with the left Hand.
The Golden Robe denotes Perfection; the naked Breast, the chifest Part thereof to nourish
others. The Circle, the most perfect Figure in the Mathematics.
( Ripa [1593] 1709: 60)
Studying the differences between the ways that the omission of Pittura influences the ways that
art, beauty, and perfection are portrayed provides fascinating insights into a deeper analysis of the
female personification of Painting in the year 1709 compared to earlier versions. In all three cases,
these women remain standing and appear capable of acting. They are not posed erotically, nor do
they invite the masculine gaze of desire and possession, but they are not really active and agentic.
They pose, rather than do something. Art holds a paintbrush by which to paint while Beauty and
Perfection hold instruments to measure their own bodies against an ideal of female physicality, but
they pose, rather than act. They seem to lose the conviction to act; one can literally see the loss
of s elf- c onfidence and strength. They have become frozen e mblems— r ecall the title “ Iconologia
or Moral Emblems” adapted by Tempest Pierce— t hat reduce the creative and moral power of art,
beauty, and perfection, and erases painting altogether.
Pittura: A Gendered Template for Painting
333
5 Artemisia Gentileschi’s La Pittura (1638– 1639)
Finally, let us consider a noted female artist posed as Ripa’s allegory of painting while she herself paints (herself) (Figure 32.7). There is perhaps no artist who more aptly internalized the guidelines set down by Ripa for Pittura than the successful Baroque painter, Artemisia Gentileschi, who also produced highly creative portraits of historical women such as Susanna, Lucretia, and Judith. Art historian Mary D. Garrard devoted an entire chapter to Gentileschi’s Self- Portrait as the Allegory of Painting (La
Pittura) in a book she published in 1989 on the artist’s oeuvre, after introducing the topic in a journal article in 1980 at the height of the feminist movement of reclaiming forgotten female artists throughout the history of art (Garrard 1989, 1980; Parker and Pollock 1981). Gentileschi became well known as an oil painter who worked in rich colors applied to stretched canvases, adept at realistic depictions of men, women, and historical figures, as well as portraits of herself.
Artemisia Gentileschi (1593– 1652) reportedly painted Self- Portrait as the Allegory of Painting (La
Pittura) in oil on canvas around 1638– 1639 at the age of 46, although there is speculation that she
created other self- portraits earlier that have been lost (Whitaker, Clayton and Loconte, 2007, 301).
(Garrard, it should be noted, dates the work earlier in her 1989 book. This essay adopts the later
date of the Royal Collection Trust.) She was invited to London in 1638 by King Charles I to join
her father, Orazio Gentileschi, who had already arrived 12 years prior and in whose atelier she had
been trained. Her work became popular among 17th- century collectors and the record shows that
La Pittura was directly acquired by the king in 1649 at Hampton Court.
In her painting, she pictures herself in iridescent green, with billowy sleeves, wearing a gold
chain dangling a mask, black hair out of place, and holding a brush in one hand and a palette in the
other. She chose not to cover her mouth and she posed herself seated at an easel, working on a large Figure 32.7 Artemisia Gentileschi. Self- Portrait as the Allegory of Painting (La
Pittura). c. 1638– 1639. Oil on
canvas. 98.6 × 75.2 cm. Royal Collection Trust
Peg Brand Weiser
334
canvas to her left with her right hand holding a brush positioned above it. Even her drappo cangiante,
garments with changing colors, testified to her abundant technical skills in applying paint to
canvas as well as indicated her painterly preference for colore ( color) over disegno ( design) by which
she cleverly took sides in a debate that raged at the time among aesthetes of the Academia di San
Luca, including Lomazzo. The painting on which she works melts into the brownish background,
as does the back of her own figure since she wears a brown apron over her dress. She appears to
emerge from the painting itself and/ or to disappear into its indistinct color field. Her left arm rests
on a stone slab for mixing paints. She is agentic, self- identified as an artist, boldly portraying her
own visage ( difficult to capture in a painted likeness given her body positioning), as the personification
of painting itself, Ripa’s Pittura. In homage to Iconologia, she titled the painting, La Pittura.
Whereas in her individualized treatments of other iconographic themes she was concerned to
offer uniquely female interpretations that were alternative to men’s versions, in the Allegory of
Painting she demonstrated not an alternative understanding of a subject, but a fusion of two
themes that, under existing conventions, only a female artist could have combined.
( Garrard 1989: 337)
She was influenced, perhaps, by a portrait medal of the Bolognese painter Lavinia Fontana created
in 1611 that showed the female artist— in a historically accurate depiction— in profile on the
obverse, and on the reverse, an image of a female painter at work as Ripa’s Allegory of Painting.
Gentileschi “ took the idea one step farther, fusing artist and allegory in a single image to create
an aesthetically richer and philosophically more significant application of Ripa’s iconography”
( Garrard 1989: 339). Considered a “ brilliant invention” by one critic ( Woodall 2005: 27), Garrard
explains the unique opportunity employed by the painter:
By joining the types of the artist portrait and the Allegory of Painting, she managed to unite
in a single image two themes that male artists had been obliged to treat separately, since by
tradition the art of painting was symbolized by an allegorical female figure, and thus only a
woman could identify herself with the personification.
( Garrard 1989: 339)
Thus Gentileschi recalls the first s elf- p ortraits by women in ancient times and rescues the diminishing
British and Dutch reputation of women artists in the Renaissance by fusing the female- a rtist
self- portrait with Ripa’s female- artist allegory of painting, Pittura. Garrard noted the challenge
posed for male artists who were subsequently, from 1593 through the height of Ripa’s popularity
into the 18th century, denied the option creatively set as pictorial precedent by Gentileschi.
The template had been gendered female; awkward attempts, e.g., Allegory of Painting ( c. 1639) by
Giovanni Domenico Cerrini ( 1 609– 1 681) showed a bare- chested, young female artist with flowing
drapery ( shown only from the waist up), paintbrush and palette in hand, displaying her painting
of him placed on an easel ( Garrard 1989: 351, 353). Giovanni Paolo Lomazzo ( 1538– 1600)— the
art theorist/ artist who commented upon Michelangelo’s strong female b odies— p resents himself
in Self-Portrait (c. 1568) with an assumed name scripted across the bottom of the painting, a laurel
wreath on his head, and a measuring instrument in his hand. Diagonally across the lower right of
the painting is a branch, a vine with leaves ( Woodall 2005: 25). The accoutrements are not those
of Painting, but rather those of Art: another allegorical category denied to men.
The rest, we might surmise, is history: the continued depiction by male artists since the
Renaissance of women nude, reclining, erotic, available for male pleasure through the masculine
gaze, and stripped of agency— except for her “ charms” to seduce. Two divergent paths, only one
of which glorified women as painters, artists, talented, capable, beautiful inside and out, agentic,
Pittura:
A Gendered Template for Painting
335
and approaching perfection. The audacity of Gentileschi inspired many other female painters over
the centuries while men were forced to forego the honor by which they could pose as Pittura or
Art, or even Perfection. Not even “ smart phone” applications that easily turn one’s own image
into a “ Renaissance painting” can compete with actual artworks covered with paint, executed
by painters ( Prior 2019; Larson 2018). With the recent work of painters like Jenny Seville and
Joan Semmel who vividly portray their own nude bodies in defiance of m ale- defined conventions
of beauty, as well as the culturally referential paintings by Mickalene Thomas who substitutes
African American bodies for those of white women and expands the range of queer identity into
gendered roles in art history, painters continue to explore an array of possibilities. The gendered
template of Pittura invites artists— male, female, nonbinary, transgender, intersex, “ women” of
any identity and p ersuasion— to adopt the template and extend it yet again.
Note
1 Translations of the basic text of Cesare Ripa’s Iconologia vary. Not all translate the original 1593 edition
or his own subsequent versions ( beginning in 1603) ver batim, nor do translations produced for three
centuries necessarily translate the original or include all of the original. Later translations, or “ editions”
as they are called, also include new, additional material not in the original text.
Works Cited
Borzello, Frances. 1998. Seeing Ourselves: Women’s Self-Portraits. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. Publishers.
Chadwick, Whitney. ( 1990) 2020. Women, Art and Society. 6th ed. New York: Thames & Hudson.
Cheney, Liana De Girolami, Alicia Craig Faxon and Kathleen Russo. 2000. Self-Portraits by Women Artists.
Aldershot and Brookfield, VT: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Cole, Alison. 1998. “ The Perception of Beauty in Landscape in the Quattrocento.” In Concepts of Beauty in
Renaissance Art, edited by Francis A mes- L ewis and Mary Rogers, 2 3– 3 8. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing
Limited.
Fermor, Sharon. 1998. “ Poetry in Motion: Beauty in Movement and the Renaissance Conception of Leggiadrìa.”
In Concepts of Beauty in Renaissance Art, edited by Francis Ames- L ewis and Mary Rogers, 124–
133. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Garrard, Mary D. 1980. “ Artemisia Gentileschi’s S elf- Portrait as the Allegory of Painting.” Art Bulletin 62
(March): 97–112.
Garrard, Mary D. 1989. “ The Allegory of Painting,” in Artemisia Gentileschi, 3 37– 3 70. New Jersey: Princeton
University Press.
Higgie, Jennifer. 2021. The Mirror and the Palette: Rebellion, Revolution and Resilience: 500 Years of Women’s
Self-Portraits. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Larson, Selena. 2018. “ Google App Matches Your Face to a Famous Painting.” CNN Money. January 15,
2018. Accessed June 8, 2021. https://money.cnn.com/2018/01/15/technology/google-art-selfie-apphow-
to/index.html.
McGrath, Elizabeth. ( 2003) 2010. “ Cesare Ripa.” Grove Art Online. Last modified May 26, 2010. https:// wwwoxfordartonline-
com.proxyiub.uits.iu.edu/groveart/view/10.1093/gao/9781884446054.001.0001/oao-
9781884446054-e-7000072246?rskey=1amgKY.
Nelson, Jonathan K. 2017. “ Poetry in Stone: Michelangelo’s Ducal Tombs in the New Sacristy,” in San
Lorenzo: A Florentine Church, edited by Robert W. Gaston and Louis A. Waldman, 450– 480. Florence:
Villa I. Tatti.
Nochlin, Linda and Catherine Grant. 2021. Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists? 50th anniversary
edition. New York: Thames & Hudson.
Parker, Rozsika and Griselda Pollock. ( 1981) 2020. Old Mistresses: Women, Art and Ideology. London:
Bloomsbury.
Prior, Ryan. 2019. “ An App That Turns Your Photos into Renaissance Paintings Became So Popular That
It Crashed.” CNN Style. July 24, 2019. Accessed June 8, 2021. https:// www.cnn.com/ style/ article/ a iphoto-
app-renaissance-painting-trnd-scn/index.html.
Redeal, Liz, Whitney Chadwick, and Frances Borzello. 2002. Mirror Mirror: Self- Portraits by Women Artists.
New York: Watson-Guptill.
Peg
Brand Weiser
336
Ripa, Cesare. 1593. Iconologia Overo Descrittione dell’Imagini Universali Cavate Dall’antichità et da Altri Luoghi
da Cesare Ripa Perugino. Opera non Meno Utile, Che Necessaria a Poeti, Pittori & Scultori, per Rappresentare le
Virtù, Vitij, Affetti, & Passioni Humane. Rome. G. Gigliotti.
Ripa, Cesare. [1593] 1764–67. Iconology of the Cavaliere Cesare Ripa Perugino Notably Enlarged by Images, Annotations,
and Facts by Abbot Cesare Orlandi... 5 vols. Perugia: Printing of Piergiovanni Costantini, 1764– 1767.
Translated by A SiM - Archivi e Sistemi Multimediali: https:// translate.google.com/ translate?hl=en&sl=
it&u=https://www.asim.it/iconologia/ICONOLOGIAview.asp%3FId%3D256&prev=search&pto=aue.
Ripa, Cesare. 1603a. Iconologia Overo Descrittione di Diverse Imagini Cavate Dall’antichità & di Propria Inventione,
Trovate & Dichiarate da Cesare Ripa Perugino, Cavaliere de Santi Mauritio & Lazaro. Di nuovo revista, & dal
Medesimo Ampliata di 400 & più Imagini et di Figure ad Intaglio Adornata…Rome. [with 150 woodcuts]
Ripa, Cesare. 1603b. “ Introduction.” Iconologia: Ouero, Descrittione di Diuerse Imagini Cauate Dall’antichità, & di
Propria Inuentione,... Rome. Translated by Rawn Clark, from a manuscript in the British Library Ms. Add 23195.
Accessed June 8, 2021. https://www.scribd.com/document/29473489/The-Iconologia-of-Cesare-Ripa.
Ripa, Cesare. 1644. Cesare Ripa’s Iconologia of Uytbeeldinghen des Verstants. Translated by Dirck Pietersz.
Amsterdam. De facsimile ervan is ontleend ann: Cesare Ripa. Iconologia of Uytbeeldinghe des Verstands.
Met introductie van Jochen Becker, [Irving, TX] Davaco Publishers, Soest 1971. [with 196 woodcuts by
Christoph Jegher] https://www.dbnl.org/tekst/pers001cesa01_01/colofon.php.
Ripa, Cesare. 1709. Iconologia or Moral Emblems by Caesar Ripa … Illustrated with three Hundred and Twentysix
Humane Figures, with Their Explanations, Newly Design’d and Engraven on Copper by J. Fuller, Painter,
and other Masters. London. Translated by Tempest Pierce. http:// emblem.libraries.psu.edu/ Ripa/ Images/
ripatoc.htm.
Ripa, Cesare. (1758–60) 1971. Baroque and Rococo Pictorial Imagery: The 1758– 60 Hertel Edition of Ripa’s
‘Iconologia’, intro. Translated and edited by E. A. Master. New York: Dover Pictorial Archives.
Shiner, Larry. 2001. The Invention of Art: A Cultural History. Chicago and London: University of Chicago
Press.
Venable, Bradford. 2008. “ The ‘ Iconologia:’ Helping Art Students Understand Allegory.” Art Education 61(3)
(May, 2008): 15–21.
Whitaker, Lucy, Martin Clayton and Aislinn Loconte. 2007. The Art of Italy in the Royal Collection: Renaissance
and Baroque. London: Royal Collection Enterprises Ltd.
Whitaker, Lucy and Aislinn Loconte. [2007] 2010. The Art of Italy in the Royal Collection: Renaissance and
Baroque. London: Royal Collection Trust. Accessed June 8, 2021. https:// www.rct.uk/ collection/ 405551/
self-portrait-as-the-allegory-of-painting-la-pittura.
Woodall, Joanna. 2005. “‘ Every Painter Paints Himself ’: Self- Portraiture and Creativity.” In Self-Portrait:
Renaissance to Contemporary, edited by Anthony Bond and Joanna Woodall, 17– 30. London: National
Portrait Gallery Publications.
Zimmermann, Hans- J oachim. 1995. “ English Translations and Adaptations of Cesare Ripa’s Iconologia:
From the 17th to the 19th Century.” De Zeventiende Eeuw 11. Accessed January 10, 2023. https:// www.
dbnl.org/tekst/_zev001199501_01/_zev001199501_01_0003.php.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-40 337
John Hyman
1 Seeing Truthfully
33TRUTH AND TRUTHFULNESS IN PAINTING
In a memoir of his days as a gallerist in New York, Julien Levy reports the following exchange about one of Picasso’s portraits of Dora Maar:
Is this woman with one eye, or three eyes, a development of cubism?” I asked Picasso. “ Not at all,” he answered. “ This double- profile, as it is called, is only because I keep my eyes always open. Every painter should keep his eyes always open. And how does that arrive at seeing truthfully, one eye or two eyes, you may ask? It is simply the face of my sweetheart, Dora Maar, when I kiss her.
( Levy, 1977; 177)
We probably should not take Picasso at his word. The remarks artists make about their work are often teasing and evasive. And besides, while it is true that when you get close enough to kiss, the view from each of your eyes will be different, Dora is not portrayed from within kissing distance in any of these paintings. But the story is instructive. Ever since Plato, philosophers and psychologists have been fascinated by anamorphosis, trompe l’oeil, and other kinds of distortion and illusion in painting. Artists on the other hand more often say that they are interested in “ seeing truthfully,” even artists who play with forms as freely as Picasso does, and artists who are intensely painterly, thematizing the brushstroke and the substance and appearance of the paint. For instance, Gainsborough summarized his approach to painting with the remark, “ I like the truth and daylight,” while Van Gogh said that his aim in painting was to be simply honest before nature.
In this article, I shall explore the place of truth and truthfulness in figurative or representational painting and drawing. I do not mean to exclude the possibility that abstract art can be truthful, but I shall not consider it here. The concepts of truth and truthfulness are contentious, and I shall discuss both of them, and the relationship between them, both in general and in the specific case of painting. But my two starting points are these.
First, a pair of definitions. Truth can be defined as agreement with reality. This is William James’s phrase ( 1907, Lecture 6), but it is not a summary of the pragmatist theory of truth, or of any other theory. James claims that it is what any dictionary will tell you, which is not quite right. But he is right in saying that the definition should not be controversial. The quarrel begins when phi-losophers interpret it. As for truthfulness, when it is attributed to a person, it can be defined as a
John Hyman
338
commitment to the truth— in other words, a resolute disposition to seek, accept, and communicate
the truth. Truthfulness concerns especially a person’s commitment to communicate the truth to
others, but not exclusively, because the desire to communicate the truth cannot be separated from
the desire to discover it or learn it, and the willingness to accept it, once discovered or learned.
A report or a description can also be described as truthful, in which case “ truthful” commonly
means the same as “ true,” although a truthful statement can also be one that expresses the truthfulness
of its author, which is not exactly the same thing. I shall sometimes attribute truthfulness
to persons and sometimes to communicative vehicles or their contents. The context will make
it obvious which sense of the word is in play. Notice that truthfulness comes in degrees, so that
one description may be more truthful than another. I shall assume that the same is true of truth.
My second starting point is that truth is not the exclusive property of language or communicated
exclusively with words. Ernst Gombrich insisted that “ a picture […] can no more be true or
false than a statement can be red or green,” basing the claim on the authority of “ logicians,” adding
that these are “ not people to be easily gainsaid” ( Gombrich, 1962; 56). But artists, historians,
and critics have always attributed truth and falsity to paintings, and a more cogent argument than
Gombrich’s appeal to authority would be required to proscribe the practice now.
Consider the paragone, the Renaissance debate about the comparative value of the arts. One of
the principal questions was whether painting or poetry is better able to represent its subject truthfully.
Here is Leonardo, making the case for painting.
La pittura serve a più degno sensu, che la poesia, e fa con più verità le figure delle opere di
natura ch’il poeta. (trat. 14) [Painting serves a nobler sense than poetry and represents the
works of nature with more truth than the poet.]
Qual poeta con parole ti mettera in’ anzi, o amante, la vera effigie della tua iddea con tanta
verità, qual farà il pittore? ( trat. 18) [What poet can represent to you in words, oh lover, the
true image of your ideal with as much truth as the painter will do?]
It is not plausible to dismiss this as an intellectual error, a metaphor, or a lazy or antiquated use of
words. Perhaps painting does not represent the works of nature with more truth than a poet does.
But if Leonardo’s boast is wrong, the reason is not that only language is capable of communicating
truth at all.
Turning to the historians and critics, Gombrich does not seem to have taken his own stricture
about truth in painting too seriously. For example, he writes admiringly of Constable that he
“ wanted nothing but the truth” ( 1951; 374).1 Nor was he the first to describe Constable’s painting
in this way. When Stendhal visited the French salon in 1824, he was thrilled by Constable’s
paintings. Classical landscapes, he insists, have “ a style and an elegance, but lack truth,” whereas,
“ the truth of [Constable’s] charming works instantly strikes and delights us” ( Harrison, 1998; 35).
When Stendhal tries to explain what he means, he reaches for an old cliché, “ the mirror of nature,”
which explains nothing at all. But this does not invalidate his original description, it only
shows that it needs a better explanation.
Thus, my second starting point is that logocentric conceptions of truth are mistaken. A plausible
theory of truth will have to encompass truth communicated by paintings, sculptures, maps,
and photographs as well as by language, and will have to accommodate the fact that Rembrandt’s
Lucretia portrays the victim of rape more truthfully than Cranach’s ( F igures 33.1 and 33.2) and
that Thomas Phillips’s portrait of the Duke of Wellington is less truthful than Goya’s ( F igures 33.3
and 33.4). In both cases, we can assess the extent to which a painting agrees with reality no less
than a description in words. For if a painting represents something as being a certain way, and it
is that way, then to that extent or in that respect, it is true; and if it represents something as being
a certain way, and it is not that way, then to that extent or in that respect, it is false. This remains
Truth and Truthfulness in Painting
339
true whether we think of a painting as representing a particular person or place, such as the Duke
of Wellington, a kind of object or scene, such as a soldier or a battle, or a subject or theme, such as
war. For example, Goya’s series of prints The Disasters of War represents its subject as truthfully as
All Quiet on the Western Front or Life and Fate.
2 Scepticism
Anyone who investigates this topic will be struck by the scepticism or mistrust expressed by 20th-
century critics, historians of art, and philosophers about the very idea that a painter can “see
truthfully,” or communicate the truth. It is a kind of scepticism philosophers still direct against
history, philosophy, and science, as well as painting, in other words, against every kind of work
where truth is a value we aspire to and that measures our success.
Bernard Williams describes the attitude well in the first few lines of his book Truth and
Truthfulness:
Two currents of ideas are very prominent in modern thought and culture. On the one hand,
there is an intense commitment to truthfulness— or, at any rate, a pervasive suspiciousness, a
readiness against being fooled, an eagerness to see through appearances to the real structures
and motives that lie behind them. [...] Together with this demand for truthfulness, however
[…] there is an equally pervasive suspicion about truth itself: whether there is such a thing; if
there is, whether it can be more than relative or subjective or something of that kind.
(Williams, 2002; 1)Figure 33.1 Rembrandt van Rijn, Lucretia, 1666. Asar Studios/Alamy
Stock Photo
John Hyman
340
Figure
33.2 Lucas Cranach d. Ä., Lucretia, ca. 1530. Art Collection 4/ Alamy Stock Photo
Williams defends the orthodox doctrine that truth is a valid goal of enquiry, however difficult it may be to attain; and he argues that truthfulness— when it is attributed to a person— is com-posed of two “ basic” virtues, accuracy and sincerity, the first of which is needed when we seek the truth, and the second when we communicate the truth to others.
This approach seems to me partly right and partly wrong. Williams’s guiding thought that philosophers have focused on truth at the expense of truthfulness is astute. And he is right that truthfulness, when it is attributed to persons, includes both intellectual and moral dispositions.2 But he makes two connected mistakes. F irst— as he seems to acknowledge ( e.g. 2001; 124)— he draws a sharper distinction between the dispositions required for inquiry and communication than exists in reality; and second, as a result, the second basic virtue he postulates, “ sincerity”— which he defines as “ a disposition to make sure that one’s assertion expresses what one actually believes”— is too narrowly tailored to the communicative act. The more inclusive concept of hon-esty is more apt. Both inquiry and communication often call for clarity of thought, precision, and attention to detail; and both often call for honesty as w ell— the honesty to resist, as far as possible, the temptations that beset us to distort, or sanitize, or idealize, or simply falsify the truth, for the sake of some kind of satisfaction or advantage, or simply to avoid facing up to painful facts. So I prefer not to postulate distinct virtues for inquiry and communication, but to recognize instead
Truth and Truthfulness in Painting
341
Figure
33.3 Thomas Phillips, The Duke of Wellington, 1814. Lifestyle Pictures/ Alamy Stock Photo
Figure
33.4 Francisco de Goya, The Duke of Wellington, 1812. Picture Kitchen/ Alamy Stock Photo
John Hyman
342
that truthfulness includes the same complex set of dispositions in both cases, although the balance between them varies from case to case.
I shall return to the concepts of truth and truthfulness in due course; but I want to look now at the reasons art historians and philosophers have given to support their scepticism about the ability of art to record and communicate the truth.
Broadly, there are two kinds of reasons, both of which are comparable to the kinds of reasons that have been thought to support scepticism about truth in history, philosophy, and science. But they generally take a special form when they are applied to painting, because in this case, they rely on an assumption about what the truthfulness of a picture would have to consist in, if it existed, namely, in being a good copy or likeness or a faithful imitation of what it depicts. They make this assumption, and then they protest either that a painting is never a faithful imitation or likeness of what it depicts, or that it is not actually an imitation or likeness at all.
The first reason for scepticism is the belief that painting is inevitably shaped by the local per-spectives and conventions, the prejudices and values that limit and control art, as they limit and control the whole of human life. All art is subjective— “ la nature vue à travers un tempérament” ( nature viewed through a temperament), as Zola put it— or worse, it is ideological and tenden-tious, and so it cannot be a true mirror or faithful representation of what it represents.
Thus, the great American art historian Meyer Schapiro insisted that there is no such thing as a “ passive, ‘ photographic’ representation in art.” “ All renderings of objects,” he insists, “ proceed from values, methods and viewpoints which somehow shape the image and often determine its contents” ( Schapiro, 1978; 195– 196). Gombrich, who transformed the study of the visual arts in the 1960s, by re- thinking their relationship with psychology and optics, declared that “ The innocent eye is a myth” ( Gombrich, 1962; 250). And by the 2000s, the suspiciousness Williams mentions, the “ readiness against being fooled,” had become the norm so that even a study of ancient Greek vase p ainting— not exactly the most radical branch of art h istory— could include a trenchant statement of a similar idea.
It is commonplace to celebrate the objectivity of artists, their powers of observation, and their tireless curiosity. In this way, representational systems take on all the authority of science: dispassionate observation, not historical milieu, determines stylistic development.
( Neer, 2002; 28)
The second reason for scepticism is sometimes addressed to art in general, and sometimes to art in a so- called “ realistic” style. Here the argument is that although we may imagine that a landscape by Courbet or Constable is a true likeness or imitation of reality, or a truer one than a landscape by Claude or Turner, works of art are actually composed of signs that are as arbitrary and conven-tional as words. Leo Steinberg— one of Tom Wolfe’s three “ kings of Cultureberg”— makes this sceptical point directly:
“ Technical capacity in the imitation of nature” simply does not exist. What does exist is the skill of reproducing handy graphic symbols for natural appearances, of rendering familiar facts by set professional conventions.
( Steinberg, 1972; 293)
But if paintings are composed of conventional signs or graphic symbols, then styles of painting— such as the Geometric style in archaic Greece, or the style familiar from Japanese Ukiyoe p rints— are like languages, inasmuch as they are simply alternative systems of semantic and syntactic rules. Hence paintings in one style cannot be truer or closer to reality than paintings in another style, any more than descriptions could be truer or closer to reality, purely because they are in Japanese or Greek. Some styles of art are called “ realistic,” but the label belongs to a false ideology. “ The
Truth and Truthfulness in Painting
343
literal or realistic or naturalistic system of representation,” Nelson Goodman concluded, “ is simply
the customary one” ( Goodman, 1976; 38).
Taken together, these sceptical remarks represent a sea- c hange in attitudes towards art. For in
the 20th century, the very idea of how art and reality are related was transformed. But how much
truth is there in this new orthodoxy? My view is that both lines of argument are partly right and
partly wrong and that only the part that is wrong supports the sceptical conclusions art historians
and philosophers have drawn. I shall comment on them in turn under the headings Art and Objectivity
and Art and Language.
3 Art and Objectivity
It is not difficult to assess the first three quoted remarks. The first t wo— by Schapiro and G ombrich—
are true, or broadly true, while the third is lamentably confused. But nothing that is true in any of
them supports a sceptical view about the ability of art to record and communicate the truth.
Beginning with Schapiro, it is true that the visual arts “ proceed from values, methods and
viewpoints which somehow shape the image and often determine its contents.” My only quarrel
is with the preceding claim that there is no such thing as passive, “ photographic” representation
in art, which despite the scare quotes implies that photography is different. In fact, no medium of
communication is inherently truthful or objective. For example, Philip Jones Griffith’s Vietnam
Inc. proceeds from values, methods, and viewpoints just as much as Goya’s The Disasters of War.
But of course, this does not undermine Schapiro’s main point, on the contrary, it reinforces it.
It is also true, as Gombrich says, that “ the innocent eye” is a myth. This is Gombrich’s name for
a popular idea about the artistic process that he did more than anyone else to debunk. It was based
on the theory that our raw visual impressions of the world consist in patterns or arrays of colours,
which we learn to interpret— unconsciously and automatically— by means of concepts. As a result,
our mature visual experience presents us with visible objects of specific kinds disposed in three
dimensions, and we find it extremely difficult to see once again, as it is thought we did when we
were infants, the raw patterns of colour visible objects present to the innocent eye.
According to the myth Gombrich opposes, the painter’s task is to abstract from the framework
of concepts, dissolve the boundaries between objects, recover the raw visual impressions the innocent
eye perceives, and reproduce them on a surface. This theory of painting was widely accepted
by psychologists, artists, and critics in the 19th century, including John Ruskin, who expounds it
in the passage from The Elements of Drawing where the phrase “ the innocence of the eye” occurs:
The whole technical power of painting depends on our recovery of what may be called the
innocence of the eye; that is to say, of a sort of childish perception of these flat stains of colour,
merely as such, without consciousness of what they signify.
( Gombrich, 1962; 250) 3
Gombrich was right to reject this way of thinking about the artistic process, because the model
of visual experience on which it depends is misconceived. Nineteenth- c entury psychologists inherited
it from an older tradition in optics, enriched with Kantian philosophy, but it was a purely
imaginary idea, not based on evidence, but rather, ironically, on a spurious analogy between the
visual process and the task of seeing what a painting represents ( Hyman, 2006; C hapter 10).
However, neither the fact that the artistic process does not involve eliminating the influence of
concepts on our visual experience of the world nor the fact that art proceeds from values, methods,
and viewpoints supports the sceptical conclusion that art cannot communicate the truth. This
would follow only if values, methods, viewpoints, or concepts made truthful communication
impossible, but the opposite is the case. Truthful communication would be impossible without
John Hyman
344
values, methods, viewpoints, and concepts, because without them we could not learn to distin-guish between truth and falsehood or acquire the intellectual and moral dispositions— t he clarity of thought, the attention to detail, and the h onesty— on which truthfulness depends.
The third quotation is a different case. Here it is again.
It is commonplace to celebrate the objectivity of artists, their powers of observation, and their tireless curiosity. In this way, representational systems take on all the authority of science: dispassionate observation, not historical milieu, determines stylistic development.
This is a plainly sceptical remark. The claim here is that if we celebrate the objectivity of artists, their powers of observation, and their tireless curiosity, we assimilate art to science and ignore the influence of “ historical milieu” on the development of artistic s tyles— s uch as in Greek v ase- painting, in the sixth and fifth centuries BC, which is the author’s subject.
So are the objectivity of artists, and their powers of observation, and their tireless curiosity an-other myth? Observation is at the heart of painting and sculpture at all times and in every culture, even if it is mainly the observation of other works of art. But it is true that the curiosity of artists and their powers of observation have been exaggerated, sometimes by artists themselves. One sign of this is that writers have generally described optical effects long before painters learned to represent them. For example, the appearance of sunlight on a wall or pavement is mentioned by Saint Bernard of Clairvaux; but there is no record of it in 12th- century painting. Jan Van Eyck’s The Virgin in the Church, which dates from the late 1430s, may be the earliest example. Again, the French naturalist Georges Louis Leclerc described the varying colours of shadows in a lecture at the French Academy of Sciences in 1742, and similar observations were reported to the Royal Society in the 1790s. But they first appeared in English watercolours in the 19th century.
At the same time, artists have made discoveries, and not only about optical effects. For ex-ample, Greek vase painters began to depict the posture of a running man with his forward arm opposite his forward leg between 530 BC and 480 BC. It was not necessary to use a camera with a rapid shutter speed to discover this, as it was when Eadweard Muybridge discovered how a horse gallops. But both discoveries enabled artists to represent particular kinds of motion with greater accuracy than before.
The record of visual discovery in art can be exaggerated or underestimated. But it is confused to imagine that if we celebrate the objectivity, observation, and curiosity of a rtists— the traits that make discovery possible— we are assimilating art to science, or ignoring the influence of “ historical milieu” on the evolution of style. The root of the confusion is the idea that observation and milieu are competing factors, one of which operates in science and the other in art. This is dou-bly wrong. On the one hand, while many artists have acute powers of observation, the particular phenomena they observe and the techniques they use to observe them are influenced both by forces within the artistic tradition itself and by facts beyond i t— b y their “ historical milieu.”4 On the other hand, this is equally true of science. It applies to Newton and Darwin just as much as it does to Leonardo and Vermeer.
In sum, the opposition between “ dispassionate observation” and “ historical milieu” is false both in the case of art and in the case of science. So there are no plausible grounds here for scep-ticism about the ability of art to record and communicate the truth. Truth does not depend on transcending h istory— in either science or art.
4 Art and Language
I said that there are two main reasons for scepticism concerning the ability of art to communi-cate the truth. The first is that art is never a faithful imitation of what it represents, because it
Truth and Truthfulness in Painting
345
is inescapably subjective or ideological, shaped by the artist’s values, methods, viewpoint, and
concepts, or those that were prevalent when it was made. The second is that art is not really
an imitation at all: it consists in signs that are as arbitrary and conventional as words. Recall
Steinberg:
“ Technical capacity in the imitation of nature” simply does not exist. What does exist is the
skill of reproducing handy graphic symbols for natural appearances, of rendering familiar
facts by set professional conventions.
It is widely believed that some artistic styles are truer or closer to reality than others, but according
to Steinberg artistic styles are just alternative systems of conventions, like languages or codes. The
things we say are not truer or closer to reality if we say them in French, and we cannot expect
them to be truer or closer to reality if we paint them in French either.
If this argument were sound, it would not follow that art is incapable of communicating truth,
it would only follow that it does so in the way that language does, by means of signs that are as
conventional as words. It is only if we add the premise that a truthful work of art would have to be
a faithful imitation of its subject that we can draw the sceptical conclusion. But even without this
premise, the argument still expresses the “ pervasive suspicion” about truth Williams d escribes—
“ whether there is such a thing; if there is, whether it can be more than relative or subjective or
something of that kind”— because it implies that the verisimilitude we attribute to Caravaggio’s
or Velazquez’s art is an illusion, created perhaps by the ascendancy their style attained, and the
consequent ease and familiarity with which we “ read” their work:
Realism is relative, determined by the system of representation standard for a given culture
or person at a given time. Newer or older or alien systems are accounted artificial or
unskilled.
( Goodman, 1976; 37)
Again, I think there is something right about the analogy between artistic styles and languages.
But it does not support this relativistic conclusion about realism, for the simple reason that
languages— u nlike c odes— expand to express new ideas and new observations.5 “ All you need is
love” can probably be translated into every human language that is known, but the same is not
true of “ E=MC2” or “ Energy is equivalent to mass.” The difference between Italian painting in
the trecento and the seicento, for example, is not like the difference between two languages or
dialects, it is like the difference between the English of Chaucer and the English of Milton, the
English of The Canterbury Tales and the English of Paradise Lost. The Canterbury Tales is not inferior
to Paradise Lost, and Giotto was not a lesser artist than Caravaggio. But the language at Milton’s
disposal was far richer than the language available to Chaucer, and the same is true of the technical
resources artists could draw on in the 1600s to depict drapery, anatomy, space, light, and shade, by
comparison with three centuries earlier. The terms “ realism” and “ naturalism” are often used to
describe the result of this kind of expansion in expressive power.6
Hence, we can agree with the claim that artistic styles are comparable to languages without
accepting the implausible idea that “ the […] realistic system of representation is simply the customary
one” ( Goodman), or that “‘ technical capacity in the imitation of nature’ simply does not
exist” ( Steinberg). The analogy between art and language is a helpful corrective to traditional
ways of thinking about the “ imitation of nature,” such as Ruskin’s ( above), or Leonardo’s:
The painter, through himself alone, without the aid of anything appertaining to the various
sciences, or by any other means, achieves directly the imitation of the things of nature.
John Hyman
346
But it is a mistake to assume that if this is rejected, then “ the objectivity of artists, their powers of observation, and their tireless curiosity” must be rejected too; or to imagine if that if a painting cannot be a “ passive, ‘ photographic’ representation,” it can only be a “ handy graphic symbol.”
The best way to prove that these are false choices is to look at actual examples. Take Leonar-do’s anatomical drawings ( F igure 33.5). They not only belie Leonardo’s own description of his achievement but also confront writers who dismiss the objectivity and curiosity of artists on the-oretical grounds with hard facts. A. Hyatt Mayor’s comment about these drawings is particularly telling:
It does not matter that Leonardo lacked the academic system to do what Vesalius and Calcar were later to do as a team, for he had a rarer gift. He was the first man who, having found the plan in a limp confusion of tissues, and having unravelled the track of a wet thread of nerve, then could draw his exploration so unmistakeably that his drawings can forever guide any dissector in comprehending the structure in a tangle that opens under his knife.
( Hyatt Mayor, 1984; 67)
Leonardo, Hyatt Mayor suggests, devised “ a classic compromise between a copy of appearances and an abstract diagram of connections understood by the intellect,” and he points out that this kind of “ analytical picture- making” played an indispensable role in the development of modern science, which could not have been played by photography, because “ the camera cannot think.”
This is an especially illuminating description of truthful communication in the visual arts, be-cause it shows how complex the task is. It explodes the myth of the innocent eye more effectively than philosophy can alone; but it also reveals a kind of shallowness in the sceptical reaction against the myth by some of the writers ( not all) quoted above.
In sum, none of the arguments I have considered justifies scepticism about the ability of art to communicate truth. However, they do draw attention to a variety of untenable conceptions of truth and truthfulness in art, which span several centuries and were promulgated by many of the greatest theorists of art, including Leonardo himself. I shall turn now to the task of explaining how we can correct these traditional conceptions of truth and truthfulness in painting, without embracing scepticism. In the next section, I shall focus narrowly on the problem of formulating an inclusive definition of truth. Then in the final section, I shall consider what truth and truthfulness in painting consist in, and why they are of value.
5 Truth in Painting ( La Vérité en Peinture)
Philosophical ideas about truth in the 20th century were invariably about truth communicated in words: true sentences, true statements made by uttering sentences, or true beliefs expressed by uttering sentences.7 Philosophers were divided on the question of whether truth is a property of sentences themselves. Wittgenstein, Tarski, and Quine held that it is, whereas Frege, Ramsey, and Strawson held that it is not. But the assumption that language is the sole means by which truth is communicated was never a matter of dispute. But if we think about the history of art, and the history of discourse about art, this looks like a textbook case of tunnel vision— as if a theory of animal locomotion was confined to running and jumping and ignored swimming and flying, or a semantic theory was so fixated on nouns that it ignored verbs.
The exclusive focus on language as the vehicle of truth is one of two mutually reinforcing ideas which originated in the 20th century and remain predominant today. The other is the deflationary idea that the statement that a certain proposition is true is equivalent to a statement of the proposition itself. For example, the statement that Tolstoy’s famous dictum that all happy families are alike is true is equivalent to the statement that all happy families are alike. Frege expressed the idea as follows:
Truth and Truthfulness in Painting
347
Figure
33.5 Leonardo da Vinci, Myology of the shoulder region, ca. 1510. incamerastock/ Alamy Stock Photo
John Hyman
348
It is worthy of notice that the sentence ‘ I smell the scent of violets’ has the same content as the sentence ‘ it is true that I smell the scent of violets’. So it seems, then, that nothing is added to the thought by my ascribing to it the property of truth.
(1977)8
Frege’s insight was elaborated in many different ways, but its association with logocentrism was a constant. For example, consider Quine’s disquotational theory of truth. In Word and Object, Quine echoes Frege’s remark, claiming that “ to say that the statement ‘ Brutus killed Caesar’ is true […] is in effect simply to say that Brutus killed Caesar” ( 1960; 24), and in Philosophy of Logic, he develops the idea as follows:
The truth predicate is a reminder that, despite a technical ascent to talk of sentences, our eye is on the world. This cancellatory force of the truth predicate is explicit in Tarski’s paradigm: ‘ Snow is white’ is true if and only if snow is white. Quotation marks make all the difference between talking about words and talking about snow. The quotation is a name of a sentence that contains a name, namely ‘ snow’, of snow. By calling the sentence true, we call snow white. The truth predicate is a device of disquotation.
(1970; 12)9
Quine’s thought is this. A sentence placed in quotation marks, such as “ Snow is white” is no lon-ger a sentence, it is a singular term referring to the sentence. Hence, we can form a complete sen-tence by adding a predicate to it, for example, “‘ Snow is white’ is an English sentence” or “‘ Snow is white’ is true.” Quine’s proposal that the truth predicate is a device of disquotation means that adding the predicate “ is true” to a singular term referring to a sentence has the same effect as re-moving the quotation marks, which would take us back to the original sentence. Hence the state-ment that the sentence “ Snow is white” is true is equivalent to the statement that snow is white.10
Quine’s theory of truth was meant to be iconoclastic. Truth, he tells us, has no more depth or substance than a pair of quotation marks. But it is iconoclastic in more senses than one, since it rules out ascribing truth to paintings. Consider what Quine calls Tarski’s paradigm:
“ Snow is white” is true if and only if snow is white.
This formula neatly illustrates the striking fact that a declarative sentence— e very declarative sentence— s ays exactly what has to be the case in order for it to be true.11 For instance, the sentence “ snow is white” says that snow is white, which is exactly what has to be the case in order for the sentence to be true. No property apart from truth has this remarkable characteristic. Some sen-tences say what has to be the case in order for them to be in French: “ This sentence is in French,” “ This sentence is in the language spoken by De Gaulle,” and so on. But every declarative sentence says what has to be the case in order for it to be true, and it does so without even referring to itself. This must tell us something fundamental about truth itself, and Quine’s theory is designed to explain what it tells us.
Now the striking fact that every declarative sentence says what has to be the case in order for it to be true does not itself imply that truth is restricted to sentences. For equally, every picture shows exactly what has to be the case in order for it to be true. But Quine’s disquotational theory cannot encompass paintings, because it implies that the objects we describe as true ( e.g. the English sentence “ Snow is white”) invariably belong to a language that also includes quotation marks, logical connectives, and the word “ true” i tself— o r can at least be exactly translated into such a language. But a painting cannot be translated into English, or any other language. Davidson makes this point nicely. He says, “ A picture is not worth a thousand words, or any other number. Words are the wrong currency to exchange for a picture.” ( Davidson, 2001; 263) We might say, for ex-ample, that Breughel’s Icarus depicts a boy falling out of the sky, the white legs disappearing into
Truth
and Truthfulness in Painting
349
the green water, an expensive delicate ship, and so on.12 Or we might say simply that it depicts a
landscape with the fall of Icarus. But every attempt to capture what a painting represents in words
will be indeterminate and incomplete. So we cannot encompass pictures in a logocentric theory
of truth with a translation manual.
Hence, Quine’s theory of truth cannot be extended to include pictures. But the same holds
for every other theory of truth developed on the basis of Tarski’s formula or a variant of it. For
example, it holds for Field’s version of disquotationalism and Horwich’s “ minimal” theory of
truth, although Field ascribes truth to utterances and Horwich to propositions, and it also applies
to deflationary theories that owe less to Tarski, such as Grover’s prosentential theory, Strawson’s
performative theory, and Künne’s “ modest” theory. All of these theories are about the way the
truth predicate is used when we are talking about sentences, utterances, or the propositions they express, but
a convincing theory of truth will apply equally to truth communicated by pictures and by words.
So, is it possible to express the deflationary idea in a way that avoids the persistent logocentric
bias? Consider the following remark by Kotarbinski ( Tarski’s teacher), which begins by echoing
William James’s definition of truth:
In the classical interpretation, “ truly” means the same as “ in agreement with reality” […] Let
us ask what is understood by “ agreement with reality”. The point is not that a true thought
should be a good copy or likeness of the thing of which we are thinking, as a painting or a
photograph is. Brief reflection suffices to recognize the metaphorical nature of such comparison.
A different interpretation of “ agreement with reality” is required. We shall confine
ourselves to the following:
Jan thinks truly if and only if
Jan thinks that things are thus and so,
and things are indeed thus and so.
For instance, the central idea of the Copernican theory is […] that the earth revolves
around the sun; now Copernicus thought truly, for he thought that the earth revolves around
the sun, and the earth does revolve around the sun.
(Kotarbinski, 1966) 13
Kotarbinski’s position is this. Truth can be defined as agreement with reality. He does not reject
this definition, he explains it. But he refuses to explain it in terms of copying or likeness— b oth
of which are probably intended to evoke the then orthodox idea of correspondence to a fact.
Instead, he explains it simply in terms of conjunction. Setting aside his preference for the adverbial
construction ( for thinking truly as opposed to true thought), a thought or theory or hypothesis is
true, according to Kotarbinski, if and only if it is the thought or theory or hypothesis that things
are thus and so, and things are thus and so.
Kotarbinski’s position seems to me exactly right, except for two points. The first, of course,
concerns painting and photography. For while the comparison between a thought and a painting
or photograph may seem metaphorical after brief reflection, if the position I have defended is correct,
less brief reflection shows that the comparison is not metaphorical at all. Truth is indeed in
agreement with reality. And this can be explained by means of c onjunction— or alternatively by
means of identity: a thought is true if, and only if, it represents things as being a certain way and
they are that way. Alternatively, a thought is true if, and only if, the way it represents things as
being is the way they are. But this applies to every kind of representation. The Copernican theory
is true if, and only if, the way it represents things as being is the way they are, and the same applies
to a painting or a photograph.
The second point is that this deflationary conception of truth is not as far removed from the
idea that truth consists in likeness as Kotarbinski implies it is. ( Indeed, there is nothing wrong
John
Hyman
350
with saying that truth is one kind of agreement and likeness is another.) For just as agreement in general— e. g. agreement in opinion— a nd truth, in particular, can be defined in terms of identity or conjunction, so can likeness. For example, you and I agree about the way to make an omelette if, and only if, your opinion about the way to make an omelette is my opinion ( identity), in other words, your opinion is such-and-such, and so is mine ( conjunction). Equally, your bike and my bike are alike in colour, if, and only if, the colour of your bike is the colour of my bike ( identity), in other words, your bike is s uch- and- such a colour, and so is mine ( conjunction). The difference is that agreement in opinion consists in the identity of a content, whereas likeness consists in the identity of a property, or a range of properties.
6 Truth and Truthfulness in Painting
So far, I have argued for two main conclusions. First, the arguments we considered, which were thought to support scepticism about the capacity of painting for truthful communication, are fal-lacious. Truth and truthfulness are indispensable concepts in art criticism, and our use of them has not been successfully impugned. So we should not accept a theory of truth that is restricted in its scope to truth communicated in words. Second, truth in general can be defined as agreement with reality. This applies equally to truth communicated by pictures and by words. But it is not to be understood as copying or likeness in either case. It is explained in terms of identity or conjunction. Thus, we can accept the deflationary conception of truth while rejecting a formulation of it that is restricted to truth communicated by words.
Deflationary theories of truth can seem puzzling or disappointing. How can truth be a value— traditionally, one of the supreme values— if “ nothing is added to the thought by my ascribing to it the property of truth”? Why should we care about truth? Why in particular should we care about truth in painting? And what is the point of going to all this trouble to prove that art can communicate the truth, if truth has scarcely more substance than a purely logical notion such as conjunction?
There are three unsympathetic things to say in response. First, as we have just seen, likeness can also be explained in terms of conjunction. Second, the manner in which truth is defined does not cast doubt upon its value. Compare existence. We certainly care about the existence of indi-viduals and species. For instance, many people care whether the orangutan will become extinct. If existence is merely a quantity—“at-least-oneness”—this does not make their concern puzzling or absurd. Finally, if a truthful painting were properly defined as “ a good copy or likeness of the thing,” this would not explain its value. Virginia Woolf is reputed to have said, “ Art is not a copy of the real world; one of the damn things is enough.” Certainly, there is no intrinsic value in a copy. We can admire the skill involved in making it. But lies can require as much skill as the truth.
However, the puzzlement or disappointment is not entirely misplaced. For it does remind us how little a mere definition of truth can achieve— in particular, that it cannot explain why we should care about truth and truthfulness. In conclusion, I should like to offer some tentative com-ments about this question, in three parts: the first concerns truth in general, the second concerns truth in painting, and the third concerns painting as an art. I can only indicate very briefly and with insufficient nuance how I believe we can approach each part of the answer. Let me reiterate that I am concerned here specifically with representational or figurative painting, as I have been throughout.
Concerning truth in general, describing truth as a value is a metonymy.14 The value of truth is the value of our awareness of truth, which is to say the value of knowledge. True propositions may be better than false ones for a certain kind of exercise in logic, but the proposition that snow is white is not superior to the proposition that snow is black as such. Considered simply as proposi-tions they are on par. However, awareness of truth certainly is valuable, both as a means and as an
Truth
and Truthfulness in Painting
351
end. It is valuable as a means because it enables us to do the right things for the right reasons; and it
is valuable as an end because it satisfies our curiosity, or at least has the capacity to do so ( Hyman,
2015; Chapter 8). This applies to painting just as much as to language, but of course, there are
differences, because when truth is communicated in painting, it is shown rather than said.
Concerning truth in painting in particular, since painting is a visual medium, whatever we
perceive or understand or learn from a painting is ultimately due to the forms and colours it is
composed of and the forms and ( often) colours it represents.15 The relationship between these sets
of forms and c olours— t raditionally described in the language of imitation16—means that paintings
can communicate truth about appearances with an immediacy, intelligibility, and power
that language cannot match, as Leonardo understood. But it also means that paintings depend on
symbols to communicate abstractions, such as the doctrine of the Trinity, and it can illustrate but
cannot state a fact. For example, as I noted earlier, Breughel’s Icarus depicts a boy falling out of
the sky, the white legs disappearing into the green water, and an expensive delicate ship. It may
teach or remind us of the fact that suffering takes place “ while someone else is eating or opening a
window or just walking dully along,” as Auden claimed. But we cannot discover that it does so
without interpretation, i.e. without an explanation ( in words) of the painting’s meaning— which
can always be contested and revised.
Finally, concerning painting as an art, painting is not necessarily an artistic activity, any more
than writing is. But representational or figurative painting does have a communicative function,
even when this is deliberately stymied, for example, when painting decorates the interior of a
sealed tomb. So it is admired for possessing the values that pictures, texts, and other communicative
vehicles can possess, or disparaged for failing to possess them, and truth is preeminent among
these values.17
However, the arts in general, and painting in particular, also exemplify a process Quine famously
discovered in moral training and in sport: the transmutation of means into ends.18 As
Quine points out, “ we come to relish the sport of fishing as much as we relish the fresh trout to
which it was a means” ( Quine, 1979; 472). Quine writes with a light touch, but we should not
underestimate the effect this process has on our appreciation of painting as an art. For it leads us
to value the skills and dispositions that make up truthfulness as much as truth itself: clarity of
thought, precision, attention to detail, and in a culture with the “ pervasive suspiciousness” Williams
describes, honesty above all.
What do these qualities look like in painting?19 There is no general answer, any more than
there is a way they sound, when they are expressed in speech. But there are plenty of examples.
Returning to Constable, we might say that his aim in painting was to communicate his love for
the rural scenery of E ngland— e specially in his native Suffolk— b y representing it as truthfully as
he could. But what can the truthfulness of a landscape painting consist in, if it is not an accurate
record of a specific place, like a surveyor’s drawing or a map? Perhaps in avoiding different kinds
of untruthfulness. Constable refused to idealise the landscape by transforming it into an Arcadia
inhabited by goddesses and shepherds, as Poussin and Claude Lorraine had done— t hough he revered
Claude, and was inspired by his work. He shunned the picturesque. He described François
Boucher’s landscapes as “ a bewildered dream of the picturesque,” and “ the pastoral of the Opera
House,” and he cordially loathed them. And he did not transform the landscape into an apparition
or a dream, in the way that Turner— his contemporary and rival— did. “ Golden visions,” Constable
wrote of Turner, “ but only visions.” When William Blake saw Constable’s drawings, he said,
“ Why, this is not drawing but inspiration.” To which Constable replied, “ I meant it for drawing.”
A portrait is a very different case, although here too the allure of untruthfulness needs to be
resisted. Think again of Goya’s portrait of the Duke of Wellington, especially the preparatory
drawing, which was made in 1812, just after the defeat of the French at Salamanca, towards the
end of the Peninsular War ( Figure 33.6). However familiar we have become with photographs
John
Hyman
352
Figure
33.6F rancisco de Goya, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, 1812. Red chalk over graphite. © The Trustees of the British Museum
of exhausted soldiers in Stalingrad and Vietnam, it remains a haunting image, and it shows that even Goya’s finished painting is a compromise between honesty and decorum. Truthfulness looks quite different in a landscape and a portrait, and it looks different in a portrait by Goya and one by Picasso. Proust’s description of Chardin’s pastel Self-PortraitwithSpectacles as the “ faithful, highly inquisitive translation of three original elements: character, life and the mood of the moment” ( 1971; 377) does not apply to a Fayum mummy portrait. Perhaps the only valid generalization is that a truthful portrait is never a “p assive, ‘p hotographic’ representation,” and never depends on the “ innocence of the eye.” But it is evident that we can learn to recognize truthfulness in portrai-ture, and in other genres of painting, since we know where to look— a nd where not to look— f or examples. For example, it would be surprising if a critic said that truthfulness was a quality she prized in Arcimboldo or Roy Lichtenstein.
There is no single source of value or overarching motive in art, any more than in human life generally. But the experience of encountering truthfulness face to face is one of the great gifts painting has to offer, and so a philosophical theory that rules this out should be rejected, whether it comes from logic or the philosophy of art.20
Notes
1 Admittedly, the remark about Constable was written several years earlier than the one about “ logicians”; but it was left untouched in all 15 subsequent editions of The Story of Art, at least three of which include revisions.
2 Williams appears to deny that virtues are dispositions ( 2001, 125), but the text is not perfectly clear at this point, and in any case I prefer to use the term “ disposition” in a sufficiently broad sense to include virtues.
Truth and Truthfulness in Painting
353
John
Hyman
354
Gage, J. ( 1993) Colour and Culture, London: Thames & Hudson.
Gombrich, E.H. ( 1951) The Story of Art, fourth edition, London: Phaidon.
———. (1962) Art and Illusion, second edition, London: Phaidon.
Gombrich, E. H. (1982). The Image and the Eye: Further Studies in the Psychology of Pictorial Represen-tation. New York: Phaidon Press.
Goodman, N. ( 1976) Languages of Art, second edition, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Harrison, C. et al. ( 1998) Art in Theory: 1815–1900, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Hyatt Mayor, A. ( 1984) Artists and Anatomists, New York: The Artist’s Limited Edition.
Hyman, J. ( 2006) The Objective Eye, Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.———. ( 2009), “ Realism.” In S. Davies et al. ( eds.), A Companion to Aesthetics, second edition, Oxford: Blackwell.——— . ( 2013) “ Depiction.” In A. O’Hear ( ed.), Philosophy and the Arts, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.———. (2015) Action, Knowledge, and Will, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
James, W. ( 1907) Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, New York: Longman Green and Co.
Kotarbinski, T. ( 1966) Gnosiology. The Scientific Approach to the Theory of Knowledge, trans. O. Wojasiewicz, Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Künne, W. ( 2003) Conceptions of Truth, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lamarque, P.V. & Olsen, S.H. ( 2014) “ Truth.” In M. Kelly ( ed.), Encyclopedia of Aesthetics, second edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Leonardo da Vinci, (2012). The notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci (Vol. 1). Courier Corporation.
Levy, J. ( 1977) Memoir of an Art Gallery, New York: Putnam.
Merleau- Ponty, M. ( 1993) “ Cézanne’s Doubt,” trans. M. Smith. In G. Johnson ( ed.), The Merleau-Ponty Aes-thetics Reader: Philosophy and Painting, Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Neer, R.T. ( 2002) AthenianVase-Painting, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Proust, M. ( 1971) Contre Sainte- Beuve etc. ( Bibliothèque de la Pléiade), Paris: Gallimard.
Quine, W.V.O. ( 1960) Word and Object, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.———. (1970) Philosophy of Logic, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.——— . ( 1979) “ On the Nature of Moral Values,” Critical Inquiry 5. p. 471–480.
Schapiro, M. ( 1978) ‘ The Nature of Abstract Art’. In Modern Art: 19th and 20th Centuries, New York: George Braziller.———. (1997) Impressionism: Reflections and Perceptions, New York: George Braziller.
Steinberg, L. ( 1972) “ The Eye Is Part of the Mind.” In Other Criteria, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stephen, J. ( 1843) “ Ignatius Loyola and his Associates.” In Critical and Miscellaneous Essays, Philadelphia: Carey & Hart.
Tarski, A. ( 1956) “ The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages.” In J.H. Woodger ( ed.), Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williams, B.A.O. ( 2002) Truth and Truthfulness, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. ( 1961) TractatusLogico-Philosophicus, trans. D.F. Pears & B.F. McGuinness, London: Rout-ledge & Kegan Paul.
PART
VIIPhilosophers of Art

DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-42 357
34DIDEROT
Jacques Morizot
Everyone knows that until the 18th century at least, most authors were not strictly specialized. Rather they were used to writing on very different topics and in various manners. Among many others, Voltaire, Hume, and Montesquieu were active in the field of history, besides their main areas of writing, and there was not either a clear-cut dividing line between those who gave them-selves up to fiction and those dedicated to the scrutiny of technical analysis. It is all the more so in the case of Diderot who spent 20 years of his life burdened by the direction of the Encyclopédie, compiling more than 5,000 entries as principal author (his signature was a simple asterisk) but also revising or expanding others, dealing with an army of collaborators, the publishers, printers, the whole under the constant threat of censorship. The same diversity and circumstances govern also the course of his personal publications and still more in the papers given to the Correspondance littéraire. In fact, no subject was discarded beforehand as insignificant, so that it is easy to disparage him as a jack of all trades. It would nevertheless be unfair to endorse crudely such a judgement; there’s every chance that just the opposite is true and that he deserves his common name of “The Philosopher”, even though he had never claimed the statute of a professional philosopher, because whatever topic he was taking into consideration was always examined with an epistemological concern and from a critical point of view.
It is likely that Diderot had no real interest in the unity of his oeuvre. It was not indeed a sys-tem, though it rests on strong and lasting principles. Some knots are readily apparent: physiology, materialism, the struggle against superstition, but also scientific as well as moral and aesthetic preoccupations. Each of them gives a valuable approach to the whole corpus and affords insights that exceed any component. But if there is no privileged and still less mandatory viewpoint, it does not mean that all of them are equivalent or interchangeable. The hypothesis implied and supported here is that the questions raised by art provide one of the most sensitive and powerful access to its complex identity, provided that it is interpreted as a range of activities rather than as a special category of products. To this extent, it would indeed make sense – although it does seem at first sight rather surprising – to relate Diderot and Goodman, both of them being outstanding instances of radical, artful, and somewhat maverick philosophers. For them, art is not a matter of leisure or wonder but the best suitable place for studying human possibilities and experimenting on them. Besides, both of them have felt an increasing appeal toward the specificity of any form of expression.
At the centre of Diderot’s strategy on knowledge lies an active and continuous dialogue be-tween arts and sciences, whose implement and symbol is the machine, either as a material or as an intellectual device. It is highly significant that the entry “Art” in the Encyclopédie deals only with
Jacques Morizot
358
mechanical arts, not because he is not interested in the fine arts (they are treated in specialized
entries like “Composition” or “Beautiful”) but because the reality of art refers primarily to its
power of invention. Nowhere Diderot is more explicit than at the beginning of the entry “Bas”
[Stocking] when he states that the machine designed for its fabrication is functioning like “one and
unique piece of reasoning” whose product is the conclusion. This kind of analogy between art,
mind, and technology has a pervasive force everywhere in his works; thus, one has to interpret
him literally, when he speaks of Leibniz as a “machine aimed at reflection” or of Raphael as “a
painting machine”, in the way that a loom is a warping machine. Every artwork is also a machine
in itself, by its very organization and befitting interaction with organism and environment. Nothing
is derived from any strict division imposed by nature or tradition but it activates a continuum
of practices issued from a deep source and tightly interconnected. Diderot took it that “the
history of nature is incomplete without that of the arts” and in return that understanding art in
its multifarious mechanisms and spontaneity affords the best ground for a well-balanced sense of
humanity. If one takes seriously the impact of taste, the experience of drawing or similar skills is
no less essential than the development of writing.
1 A Renewed Approach to the Most Basic Artistic Notions
In his first contact with any aesthetic work written by Diderot, it would be likely for a modern
reader to gain the impression that his thought is on a par with most of his contemporaries, because
one does find in it the same sort of terminology they make use of. This would, nevertheless, be
a superficial and misleading conclusion, insomuch as behind the presence of the very same word
different representations are, in fact, brought into play. It is par excellence the case in the entry
“Beau” [Beautiful] that should later be published as a little treatise, even if Diderot’s remarks are
not yet fully developed.
Whereas his predecessors are selecting a principle purporting to explain the ascendancy of the
beautiful on human beings (Dubos favours thus pleasure, Shaftesbury moral utility, André the
degrees of perfection, etc.), Diderot tries to describe the process by which the real (or general)
beautiful is engendered, independently of the various conditions that particularize it. His answer
can be shortly summarized by the phrase “perception of relationships”. Unlike many authors of
any time, Diderot does not say that the beautiful consists in relationships such as balance or proportions
(as a formalist would say) but that beauty’s reality in our experience is an integral part
of the perceptual act that actualizes it. Given that the ability of organizing the data is inherent to
our powers of sensitivity, it is not only a spontaneous task but also an endless process that puts into
action the whole intellect. Diderot is fully aware of the distinction to be made between what he
calls real relationships that are immanent and adequate to the thing considered and perceived relationships
that exploit a casual relation with something exterior to it, and even fictive relationships
that are the mere product of imagination. But he never puts these categories on one and the same
level. Conversely, he maintains that truth is the only touchstone for art as well for science, that
“the beautiful is only the truth, but dressed with possible circumstances, though uncommon and
marvellous ones”. Indeed, the line of thought that leads to such a result is full of pitfalls.
One of the most sensitive loci is imitation, a notion taken for granted by almost everybody in
these times, Diderot included. Batteux goes even as far as trying to reduce all artistic phenomena
to a single principle, namely imitating “la belle nature”. But where is such a thing to be searched
and discovered?
Anticipating on Diderot’s stance, Batteux claims that imitation must not refer to nature as it
happens to be seen but as it should be, when conceived by mind’s activity. But Diderot is the first
to provide a full elaboration of this insight: the model needed is interior, not exterior, so that the
prospect of “beautifying nature” is null and void (he can even write that “the flesh displayed in
Diderot [1713–1784]
359
art fights against the flesh in Nature”). Above all, it is an ideal model that cannot be derived from
any individual image present in front of the artist or remembered by him. Diderot uses the word
‘portrait’ in the most derogatory sense, for denoting the act of stubbornly reproducing fortuitous
appearances (as genre painters do), without considering what is universal in scope and capable of
arousing the finest aesthetic effects (the same line of argument remains active in the Paradox of
the Actor). This does not mean for all that the model functions in the way of an archetype in the
Platonic filiation. Deeply imbued by an empiricist epistemology, Diderot sees on the contrary this
situation as an experimental and filtering process that ends up to what could be identified as “true
line”, the one so much admired in the great masters and always in danger of degenerating in their
epigones. So even if it happens that Diderot is a true admirer of Greek sculptors, he is reluctant to
give artists the advice to “reform nature after the antique” and likes better to encourage them to
study antiques in order to learn seeing nature.
Generally speaking, two symmetrical flaws are always threatening: at one side, “rigorous imitation
of nature makes art paltry, mean and shabby” and at the opposite exaggeration or affectation
produces mannerism, a “vice common to all the fine arts” that undermines the grand style. There
is an immediate counterpart on the side of the receiver. Diderot does not conceive of taste as the
effect of an internal sense setting a rule or standard, even though the pursuit of the beautiful is
neither arbitrary nor capricious (he likes to recall that, having plotted the arc of the dome of Saint
Peter’s in Rome by Michelangelo, La Hyre found that this wonderful curve was the one that offered
the greatest resistance). Taste appears to be a kind of facilitation acquired through repeated
experience, a form of perspicuity that is suited to find its way into what is intricate and uncertain.
It involves a delicate blending of reason and enthusiasm, of judgement and impulse, each one being
corrected by the other, dismissing both extravagance and commonplace.
In the entry ‘Composition’, Diderot provides a first synthesis relative to ideas that must inspire
the art of painting and reiterates them in the prologue of the Salon of 1767. A primary rule claims
that “the important point is to find a great idea”, that is an idea integrating enough richness as
suitable for a given subject (according to the context, it can mean a strong, or clever, or delicate,
or surprising, idea) and so organized that it would be difficult for someone to imagine that things
could have been otherwise. Two conditions are prevalent to ascertain such an organic display:
first, the picture should show “a whole regarded as a single point of view”. If so, “each part should
contribute its share to the principle effect”, with a complete subordination of the figures. But this
does not impose any constraint on the content itself, for a composition may be poor with too many
characters, whereas another one is rich with only a few of them. The second condition is the selection
of the most interesting moment, the one able to convey the unity of action. Anticipating
on G. H. Lessing, he insists that “the painter has but one moment and he is no more allowed to
comprise two distinct instants than two actions”, by contrast with the innumerable resources of
the poet and platitudes of poor copyists. When describing a painting, Diderot likes to note some
source of confusion or inconsistency and even proposes a tentative means to avoid it. In “My bizarre
thoughts about drawing”, he remarks that unity is already manifest in a single figure, since
it bears in each of its features her whole physiognomy; for instance, “if a woman allows her head
to droop forward, all her bodily members acknowledge its weighty pull; if she lifts and holds it
erect, there’s a similar acknowledgement from the rest of the machine”. It is also the reason why
A crooked nose in nature does not offend because everything is of a piece … [but] twist the
nose of the Antinous, leaving the rest as it is, and this nose will be unfortunate. Why? Because
the Antinous’ nose wouldn’t be twisted at all, but rather broken.
In this context, the utmost challenge for an artist lies in the invention of the adequate expression
of a passion which has yet no usual model in nature.
Jacques Morizot
360
The symbol of coherence and efficiency indispensable in any good composition, Diderot labels it the “liaison line”: “it snakes and chains the different parts of the composition” by a virtual and potent thread that guides the viewer as well as the critic who is trying to describe the picture. Ho-garth was celebrating the waving line as a line of beauty and the serpentine line as a line of grace; by contrast, Diderot focuses his attention on the cognitive and functioning import, already active in a simple sketch drawn with a pencil but confirmed through the harmony provided by colour (which is more than tincture). The most brilliant lesson given by Diderot is unquestionably his commentaries concerning two major paintings by Vien and Doyen, commissioned for the same church and exhibited in the Salon of 1767. He sincerely admires the neo-classicist virtues of Vien’s Predication of St Denis which shows the clearest liaison line, well-positioned planes, and a superior mastery in drawing, but he must recognize at the same time that it lacks any evidence of imagina-tion, ideal, and poetry, ending up in a dull picture. By contrast, Doyen’s Miracle des Ardents seems somewhat confused and even discordant, with a messy or unstable construction; yet the painting appeals irresistibly to the beholder, activating his sense of enthusiasm and sublimity. Diderot takes as much liking to it as other visitors do but he is still insisting on its defects whereas he can but praise the qualities of Vien qua artist. As it is definitely difficult to conflate reason and feeling, and any hope to beget an exceptional artist just by conjoining these complementary talents that are missing in either of them is probably doomed to remain inconclusive. This passage could be read both as a last echo of the ongoing quarrels inside the Academy a century before, and the first glow of a new sensibility that becomes aware that “imitation arts need something wild, untreated, striking and enormous”, a feature that points to the emergence of romanticism.
2 Materialism and the Senses
It is impossible to play down Diderot’s commitment to materialism, inasmuch as it has important implications everywhere in his whole work, including the fine arts. At first glance, it might seem that its influence is not so outstanding than expected, because the brand of materialism concerned has little in common with the simplistic and dogmatic thought of the thinkers generally listed un-der that label. Diderot’s background is not metaphysical nor atomistic but physiological. Its main tenet lies in the strong conviction that sensibility is a universal propriety inherent to the world, so that there is no real discontinuity between matter, life, and thinking. Basically, these are diverse manifestations of a single and still largely unknown phenomenon. The whole reality is in a per-petual flux, a metamorphosis of forms, without stability or normality – monsters themselves are part of the nature – according to D’Alembert’s Dream. In this context, the best image of the human organism is not given by a description of its visible anatomy, it is better conceived of as a beam of threads relating every component of the body to a brain centre, or some intricate kind of web that resonates with incessant impulses.
If one considers arts generally, the first index of a materialist stance is a strong emphasis upon the senses. What motivates most Diderot is not the empiricist thesis regarding the origin of ideas and knowledge but the scope and modalities of an experimental access to sensitivity. Luckily for him, that period afforded a fruitful opportunity, in the so-called Molyneux problem that draws attention to the epistemological consequences of sensory deprivation: would a man fully devel-oped but born blind be able to tell apart two solids already known through touch, like a cube and a sphere, using only his visual capacities recovered after a cataract operation? Unlike most of his contemporaries, Diderot is rather indifferent to give a simple answer (roughly a yes for the ratio-nalists and a no for the empiricists) but he finds in its subject matter a springboard for a reconfig-uration of the case of vision. He realizes that the situation of “eyes wide shut” (in the words of K. Tunstall) offers paradoxically the best viewpoint to understand how to be better acquainted with vision. He goes as far as imagining a kind of metaphysical anatomy whose object “would be to
Diderot [1713–1784]
361
analyse, as it were, a man, and to examine what he derives from each of his senses”. In the fiction
of a society of five people, each of them reduced to one sense different from the others, “there is
no doubt that these persons would look on one another as out of his wits” but they would still be
able to activate their faculty of abstraction and understand one another on the subject of geometry
and that alone (Letter on the deaf and Dumb).
The additional element of these provocative statements lies in the necessity for every man to be
exercised to get a full mastery of the organs he possesses. At the beginning, like any infant, he is
unable to see or feel anything but he improves gradually its abilities through experimenting alone,
independently of any link with others though gaining momentum through their interplay. Here
as elsewhere, Diderot prefers to focus on potentialities rather than deficiencies. He is aware that
a blind man understands perfectly well what a mirror might be, namely “an instrument which
sets things in relief at a distance from themselves, when properly placed with regard to it”. As he
is compelled to see by means of his skin, the integument has become so keenly sensitive that he
could recognize the features of something traced on his hand. So concludes Diderot, “the blind
have likewise a painting, in which their own skin serves as a canvas”. As crude as it might seem
at first sight, such an observation points to current researches developed today by neuroscientists
on brain plasticity, haptics and cross-modality. One of the most telling examples is the TVSS
(tactile-visual sensory substitution), a device that uses as interface some spot on the skin or even
the tongue to transform tactile stimuli into a visual signal simulating the experience of normal
perception. Diderot would also be impassioned by the experiments of J. M. Kennedy and others
on raised pictures, that is pictures with their contour lines in slight relief in order to be scanned
by the fingertips. They are not only visual aids, they allow to go into cognitive issues concerning
the capacity of blind people to draw or interpret such images. In particular, they afford a means to
broach space representation and perspective, a topic mentioned by Diderot when using convergent
lines to render parallels.
Moreover, Diderot remarks that “a blind people might have sculptors and put statues to the
same use as among us” since, contrary to painting that appeals only to the eyes, sculpture is for
the blind as well as for those who can see, whether or not the same experience and mechanisms
are involved. In the Salon of 1765, he says of sculpture that “its muse is violent, but secretive and
silent”, it “requires an enthusiasm that’s more obstinate and deep-seated”, a hidden fire that burns
within, because “the pencil is more licentious than the brush, and the brush more licentious than
the chisel”. As a consequence, he can assert that “few people other than practitioners of the art can
distinguish a very beautiful work of sculpture from an ordinary one” so that “I’d take the chance
of buying a picture on the basis of my own taste, my own judgment; if it were a statue, I’d ask an
artist’s advice”. Probably this explains the fact that, in spite of his admiration for Pigalle et above
all Falconet, Diderot is so short on the subject of statues. One example is nonetheless remarkable,
the little group of Pygmalion and Galatée (Salon of 1763) which he confesses he would be so fond
to have in his office. He observes that Falconet has treated his subject from a visual point of view
(Pygmalion looks at the statue that slowly becomes animated) and he proposes instead a different
version inspired by Ovid that inverts the reading of the composition without changing its layout:
Pygmalion is about to touch the statue in order to convert marble into flesh, in the same sense that
Chardin “makes flesh whenever he likes”. But although touch is recognized to be “the profoundest
and most philosophical sense”, sculpture has still to wait for Herder and Hildebrand to gain a
most prominent status in aesthetics.
3 Theatre, Painting, Semiotics
It is usually admitted that Diderot has not been successful in his own theatre attempts. This
fact did not prevent him to have produced interesting writings about dramatic art and to have
Jacques Morizot
362
nourished a continuous interplay between the worlds of the scene and painting. In fact, these relations are not absolutely new since there is a long-standing tradition of exchanges in their re-spective vocabularies. A unit part in an opera or ballet or even play is sometimes called a tableau (French word for a painting); conversely, it is common that Diderot speaks of a picture as being a scene and moreover, in front of it, a beholder may stand as much riveted as when he is looking at a show on the stage.
Michael Fried has called a careful attention to this aspect of Diderot’s thoughts on these themes. He remarks that the painters favoured by him (in the first place, Greuze and Chardin) often repre-sent figures totally engaged or absorbed in their activity, be it serious or minor, without noticing what is going on around them or the putative presence of the spectator as witness. But in fact, Did-erot wavers between two stances that have in common to oppose the falsity of representation and theatricality but diverge on the means to achieve it. The dramatic conception inherits from his-tory painting through the construction of an enclosed space, the figuration of bodily action as the best portrayal of the human soul and the emotional and ethical efficiency of the subject depicted. In such a case, there is “nobody beyond”, neither spectator nor artist, to surprise (say) an intimate scene or he would be a voyeur. This conduct would exhibit the same kind of unseemliness than an actor who is shouting at the audience. The alternative and/or complement is the pastoral view when the painting becomes a field of experimenting visual layouts and artistic potentialities. Did-erot’s literary imagination aims at the unfolding (so to speak) of what he is looking at; it narratively dissolves the boundaries of the frame, so that the beholder can fictionally enter the work. In front of the much-admired works of Loutherbourg, Le Prince, or Vernet (the famous Promenade Ver-net that develops along 40 pages!), he gives instructions to the reader, describes wonderful vistas in each site, and devises encounters and snatches of stories. As a critic, he asserts: “I substitute art for nature, in order to gain a better judgment of it”, mixing in his narrative sentences past and present tenses. At some points, he has to confess that he was forgetting he was still speaking of a painted scene, but must also avow that the contemplation of the best paintings falls short of the kind of emotion afforded by a sublime landscape.
At first sight, theatre offers the reverse situation. In his Discourse on Dramatic Poetry, Diderot gives this surprising advice: play as if the curtain never rises. It is significant that he makes use of the word “toile” (canvas), suggesting that the plane of separation must have a physical reality for actors although it remains translucent for the spectator. For him, theatre is most successful when achieving the best tableau, that is a logical and clever display of the characters involved in the plot, in so compelling a way that a painter would be tempted to imitate it. In compensation, Diderot despises the use of “coups de theatre”, these unexpected incidents that shatter the course of the action and whose effect is only superficial and momentary.
This continuous relationship between painting and theatre explains also the importance rec-ognized by Diderot to the neglected art of pantomime. From a technical point of view, it refers to a language of gestural expressiveness capable of conveying the significance of an action or a situation without any help of words. It therefore opens an appropriate room for manoeuvre to the actor who has to decide which physical embodiment is fittest to represent some features in a play, though it is no more written down than the musical continuo. The fruitful reference here is the experience of deaf-and-dumb people who show a superior penetration in being skilful to project non-linguistic signs as a means for communicating, for instance Father Castel’s harpsichord that made use of coloured fans. They reach perfect discrimination between various musical instru-ments and tones, a talent that might compete with the ability of Rameau’s nephew in miming each of them. In fact, Diderot goes as far as retaining something of their condition when listening at performances. He confesses that he was used, much to the astonishment of his neighbours, to put his fingers in his ears while watching, in order to remain the most concentrated on the bodily attitudes, as a painter would do in search of a suitable composition. So, it is no wonder that his
Diderot [1713–1784]
363
liking and taste to pictures was so colloquial, and that he was convinced that a master painter
should be the ideal director.
All these considerations point to one of the most elusive and creative notions begotten by Diderot’s
pen, that is the “hieroglyph”. It was first introduced in relation to poetry, through the order
of words and the use of figurative language. A poem may be described as a chain of overlapping
hieroglyphs – at the phonemic, syntactic, and semantic levels – woven into a single semiotic fabric.
To say that poetry is emblematic means that it stimulates the creation of a mental image of the
objects evoked in order to make them be seen. Cognition and desire cooperate in an act of critical
mimesis. In this context, it is no surprise that Diderot lays stress on the limitations imposed on
translation, from one language to another, and more radically from one sensory experience to
another. But in the same time, he is quite aware of the range of possibilities involved in a twoway
procedure when the reflected light of the metaphor is added to the direct light of the natural
expression. Before Lessing, he has understood that it is never legitimate to transfer literally from
one given art to another: Neptune raising his head above the waves may be impressive in Virgil’s
lines, but he would only look like a beheaded man in a picture. What is at stake is the upcoming
program of a comparative aesthetics: “as every imitative art has its own special hieroglyphs, I
much wish some man of taste and intelligence would make a systematic study of them” and of
their unequal correspondences. He imagines three versions of the same subject, a dying woman,
rended by a poet, an etcher, and a musician. None of these could abolish the others, because each
makes use of its proper method of expression and is liable to various kinds of constraints. The
painter’s strength lies in his capacity to show the very thing whereas poet and musician can only
look for equivalents; nonetheless, it is a fact that “the brush takes time to represent what the artist’s
eye sees in an instant” and the writer achieves in a single sentence what the painter sketches hardly
in a week. This easiness is itself partly delusive since it opens on to a new challenge, the exciting
and painful task of “painting with words” as Wollheim dubs Diderot’s approach to criticism.
4 The Magical Experience
One of the strongest tenets supported by Diderot is that “painting is the art of reaching the soul
through the intermediacy of the eye; if the effect is concerned only with eyes, the painter has
gained the lesser part of the way”. The scope of such a statement is twofold: first, it recalls that the
ultimate raison d’etre of art has to do with emulating “the moving picture of the soul”, making the
most of the philosophical echoes of the subject as well as ethical purposes like celebrating virtue
or chastising vice or failings; second, it stresses the major fact that visual experience has something
peculiar which Diderot speaks of in terms of magic. The terminology is generally associated with
his favourite painters, Chardin and Vernet, Loutherbourg, and a few others. It is also ironically
mentioned to belittle second rate artists that may show ability and even fieriness but misuse their
talent for want of genuine ideas – like Boucher who has no art thoughts, only deceptive concetti.
At this point, it is important to notice that the core of the phenomenon has little to do with
ordinary trompe-l’oeil or a vulgar form of illusion. Some statements may indeed favour such an
opinion, for example when Diderot remarks about Chardin: “in order to look at paintings by
others, it seems that I need to shape suited eyes; to see Chardin’s ones, I have just to keep the eyes
nature gave to me and make the best use of them”. Or when he characterizes ‘magic’ as a situation
in which a beholder feels the plain effect without being able to guess the cause responsible for
it. This definition is also provided by Watelet who distinguishes the common magic born out of
ignorance and the delicate and powerful achievements related to the arts.
In fact, in his Essays on Painting, Diderot is fully aware of a distinction between two sorts of
paintings. According to the first one, whenever the eye is close enough to it, it is in a position to
focus on all the minute details it contains; if conversely the viewer walks back, the image fades
Jacques Morizot
364
itself. It is up to him to discover the right distance ensuring natural appearances, a clear premoni-tion of what Gombrich calls the eye-witness principle. The other sort rests on an intentional selec-tion of aspects that make sense only in the vision of the artist. Such was Rembrandt’s method and its incomparable success. In that case, important parts of the painting resist interpretation if they are considered separately. Incidentally, Diderot lays stress on the decision to neglect secondary or non-pertinent features, and not on the effort to create artificial effects such as papillotage (flicker-ing) which the rococo painters were so fond of. Instead of a distinctive threat on the stabilization of appearances, what is first in question is often the difference prevailing between long-sighted and short-sighted persons; besides, he thinks the poet is spontaneously tempted to see an elephant in every fly, whereas the philosopher tends to reduce elephants to the size of flies.
It is worth noting that Diderot never tries to apply a rigid grid that locks up every artist in a pre-determined box. It is obvious for Chardin, Diderot’s most favoured painter. He does not belong to the first category since the description offered for The Rayfish (1728) is at the exact opposite: “close up, everything blurs, goes flat and disappears. From a distance, everything comes back to life and reappears”. And the second category is no more appropriate, given that he is renowned for his sense of precision and reality. To a large extent, he is beyond this kind of duality, retaining some-thing on each side while exceeding both of them. Apropos A Basket of Plums (1765), Diderot writes
Chardin’s handling is unusual. It resembles the summary style [la manière heurtée] in the way one can’t make things out from close up, while as one moves away the object coalesces and finally resembles nature; and sometimes it affords as much pleasure from close up as from a distance. This man is as superior to Greuze as the sky is high, but in this respect alone; he has no style; no, I’m mistaken, he does have one that’s his alone; but because it’s his own style, it should ring false in certain circumstances, and it never does.
The sophistication of Diderot’s analysis mirrors the genius of the painter but it falls short of an explanation: “At times, it looks as though the canvas has misted over from someone breathing on it; at others, as though a thin film of water has landed on it”. Still he does not abandon his ques-tioning about the procedure, asserting occasionally that, whereas the musician works with the sounds themselves as we can hear them, the painter does not use as materials flesh, blood, wool, or light but various pigments, juices, charred bones and the like which act in a kind of translation. A few pages below, the tonality is noticeably different
O Chardin, it’s not white, red or black pigment that you grind on your palette, but rather the very substance of objects; it’s real air and light that you take onto the tip of your brush and transfer onto the canvas.
Should these two statements be taken as contradictory? Rather they point to the double na-ture embedded in any work of painting that can generate a transparent and truthful image only through the thickness of its stuff.
Reading these texts in hindsight, one may be tempted to search in them a first draft of the modern theory of twofoldness. It would not be absurd though not a promising project, due to the heterogeneity of the contexts. At the very least, it should be clear that the observations pro-vided by Diderot do not take place at the same level. They do not refer to a conflict between two interpretative hypotheses, such as in Wittgenstein’s duck-rabbit figure, any more than the fusion between a configurational aspect and a recognitional aspect in the classical approach defended by Wollheim. They would be in better agreement with Gombrich when he insists on the impossibil-ity to focus at the same time on the marked surface and the subject, but Diderot is more sensitive to the changes caused by moving closer and farther (a sign fading into a stain, a blot becoming a
Diderot [1713–1784]
365
familiar form). In fact, the most fruitful insight points to Walton’s notion of make believe, because
it involves a native range of interaction between perception and imagination, visual abilities, and
the whole mind. At the same time, one must never forget that a significant part of Diderot’s writings
still remains dependent on a rhetorical background.
5 The Dawn of Criticism?
Although Diderot has written a lot on the arts, with a special care for painting, and though he was
quite conscious that this was a privileged part of his oeuvre (see his letter to Sophie Volland, 10
November 1765), it is not uncalled-for wondering if he deserves a true status of an art critic and all
the more if he played a leading role in the development or even emergence of criticism as a genre.
Anyone who reads Diderot today is inclined to give a positive answer, so much his personality
supersedes that of the vast majority of his contemporaries. However, it must be recalled that the
Salons had no public appearance at the time. They were edited in French in the Correspondance
littéraire, a private newspaper run by Grimm that was not printed but handwritten and limited to
15 copies distributed through diplomatic channels to liberal sovereigns and the elite of European
nobility. None of them was published during Diderot’s life and the complete series was not published
until 1876.
At the beginning, the impulse seems to have been a desire to do Grimm a favour but rather
quickly Diderot became quite taken with it. If the first reviews (1759 and 1761) are still a casual
collection of notes, the following ones are far more elaborate and creative, at least till 1769 when
he appears to be fed up with what did amount now to a burden. In fact, Diderot has never got a
good opinion on criticism as a professional activity. He scorns it as a silly occupation that spoils
immediate pleasure; critics are dubbed narrow brains, men of little sense, always ready to throw
poisoned needles against their opponents. By contrast, Diderot introduces himself as a plain man
of letters who says what he sees and needs to address his remarks to somebody he knows, like
anyone writing a letter. He can easily detect mediocrity and often complains about the plethora
of poor paintings, with no capacity for all that to produce something worthwhile. It is the reason
why he confesses that “he praises or blames after his personal sensation that does not establish a
rule” and claims the right not to keep to agreement with himself. This does not mean that Diderot’s
judgements are impulsive or thoughtless, but rather that he gives prominence to sincerity
in his appreciation, so that his choices tend to delineate a kind of personal imaginary museum.
It is patent that Diderot makes use of a careful method of description. He begins with the
subject (often mentioned in the title), then goes through the main figure and those related to it,
the other groups, to meaningful features such as light, physiognomies, draperies, etc., and the
resulting expression. These passages may seem rather tedious today but one has to be conscious
that Diderot has no photograph or engraving at his disposal. He regrets this situation and confesses
that a simple sketch indicating the general layout, the liaison line, and distribution of light and
shadows would afford a true benefit. For want of such drawings, the reader is compelled to imagine
through Diderot’s seductive words. Moreover, in front of some paintings, he dares to suggest
improvements to the composition, and he is proud to avow that painters ask him for subjects and
recognize in the insights given something really usable, so much pictorially grounded his unrestrained
imagination was.
Most commentators agree that Diderot has showed a correct grasp of the major trends in the
evolution of art at his times. He has been harsh with rococo or official history painters as well
as he has sensed the importance of Robert, the troubadour style or neo-classicism. For the most
part, the artists he has praised remain nowadays on the upper rank while those he has despised
have not known any revival. It cannot be denied however that his open-mindedness is sometimes
flawed by lingering prejudices, moralizing and that he was too confidently reliant on his intuitive
Jacques Morizot
366
taste. But none among his contemporaries would be exempt from the same reservations, personal genius apart.
Anyway, it does seem difficult to follow Brunetière in his unsubtle verdict concerning Did-erot’s supposed dogmatism and lack of information on the technical part of the art of painting. These strictures are disputable and, as Gita May remarks, “to evaluate the Salons as though they were ordinary critical reviews is to commit a basic error in methodology”. They do not belong to “art criticism in the usual sense of the term” and still less to any science of pictures. Their challenge is an attempt to “make an art of art criticism”. In this sense, Diderot’s natural heirs are not critics or art historians but the persistent tradition of French writers like Baudelaire, Gautier, Huysmans, or Apollinaire (among many others) that serve the defence of art through an opinion-ated and creative practice of writing. It does not replace academic disciplines but affords additional reasons to be interested in art. This insistent lesson must always complement the achievement of Diderot as a philosopher.
Further Reading
Diderot, D. (1975–1983), Salons, J. Adhémar and J. Seznec (eds.), Oxford, Clarendon Press, 2nd ed. 4 vol.
Diderot on Art, J. Goodman (transl.), vol.1 (2009) The Salon of 1765, and Notes on Painting, vol.2 (1995) The Salon of 1767, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Berri, K. (2000), “Diderot’s Hieroglyphs”, SubStance, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 68–93. doi: 10.1353/Sub.2000.0016.
Fried, M. (1980), Absorption and Theatricality: Painting and the Beholder in the Age of Diderot, Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California Press.
Topazio, V. W. and May, G. (1963) “Diderot’s Art Criticism: A Controversy”, The French Review, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 3–21.
Wilson, A. (1972), Diderot, New York, NY Oxford University Press, 2nd ed.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-43 367
35HEGEL ON SCULPTURE AND PAINTING
Richard Eldridge
Hegel’s accounts of sculpture and painting are both enriched and complicated by their relation to his metaphysics. He undertakes to describe what is peculiar or proper [eigentümlich] to sculpture and painting at various historical moments: the materials, subject matters, and modes of organi-zation that make for the most significant and effective works in these media of art (and others) at specific historical times. He takes artistic value to be essentially partially realized historically so that his accounts are simultaneously descriptive and normative. Hence his accounts take note of what has been done within these media, but the approach is not that of simple observation and generalization alone. Instead, the approach is also evaluative in focusing on what has been most significant when.1
Second, both which medium of art counts as most important and which forms, materials, and subject matters are most successful within any given medium of art vary historically, in tandem with changes in cultural, economic, and political modes of joint social life and with the changes in human self-understanding that both imply and are implied by those changes. As Robert B. Pip-pin aptly puts it, Hegel “links the meaningfulness and significance of art-historical developments to both social history and philosophical history … without any reduction of aesthetic norms to merely thematic issues” or of artworks to mere illustrations of ideas fully established elsewhere.2 Or, in Benjamin Rutter’s formulation, “the sort of world to which [the artist] belongs” matters for artistic significance and success.3 Art is a mode of human self-understanding, and major ar-tistic achievements develop and change historically in reciprocal interaction with both explicit philosophical self-understandings and implicit self-understandings that are lived out in social life.
Third, Hegel’s large-scale account of how the history of significant art develops in reciprocal interaction with sociocultural and philosophical history sees each of these histories as driven by a fundamental need of human beings, initially alienated from their lives by the facts of mutual opposition and conscious reflection on it, to find themselves freely at home within their worlds, within relations of achieved mutual recognition and endorsement. The significance of art is de-termined by how it contributes to this fundamental project. Hegel coins the term Spirit in order to describe, roughly, the ongoing interaction between reflection on the project of free life qua mutual recognition and its proper object, namely, the existing and developing forms of individual and social life that reflection is essentially devoted to understanding, reforming, and (ultimately) justifying. As Hegel puts in the Lectures on Fine Art, Spirit
Generates out of itself works of fine art as the first reconciling middle term between pure [but initially undeveloped, abstract, and empty] thought [about what is worth doing, about
Richard Eldridge
368
how to live, about freedom as achieved recognition], and what is merely external, sensuous,
and transient, between … the infinite freedom of conceptual thinking [on the one hand] and
nature and finite reality and [on the other].4
Or, in more anthropological terms, Hegel compares the development of art and the fundamental
human interests that it serves to a child’s seeking a reflection of itself in nature.
A boy throws stones into the river and now marvels at the circles drawn in the water as an
effect in which he gains an intuition of something that is his own doing. This need runs
through the most diversiform phenomena up to that mode of self-production in external
things which is present in the work of art.5
One result of these three commitments on Hegel’s parts––blending the descriptive with the normative;
seeing the histories of art, sociopolitical life, and philosophy in reciprocal interaction with
each other; and seeing those histories as unified under a large metaphysical story about the achievement
of freedom as achieved recognition––is that Hegel’s Lectures on Fine Art might offer us nothing
more than a highly speculative, ungrounded story about developments in the histories of art
and social life. Since Hegel develops his philosophy of history partly via attention to works of art6
and, conversely, his philosophy of art via attention to sociocultural history, there is at least some
risk of circularity in his approach.7 The only answer to this worry is to scrutinize the mass of detail
about media, subject matters, materials, and modes of organization that Hegel offers throughout
his lectures in order to characterize which works have been important to whom, when, and how.8
A yet further complication is that after an Introduction and a general discussion of “The Idea
of Artistic Beauty, or the Ideal,” Hegel divides his treatment of specific media into Part II, “The
Development of the Ideal into the Particular Forms of Art” and “Part III, The System of the Individual
Arts.”9 Both the titles and the division itself are somewhat misleading. In Part II, Hegel
focuses primarily on the differences between the major epochs of art history as he understands
them (Symbolic, Classical, and Romantic, or, roughly, Egyptian, Ancient Greek, and Roman up
to the present) and the media of art that are most significant during these epochs (architecture
for the Symbolic epoch, sculpture for the Classical, and, in order, painting, music, and poetry for
the Romantic). Yet, as Hegel is well aware, works in each medium exist during all epochs, and
important ranges of achievement are possible within each of them at all times, even when the medium
in question is not the most significant medium of art for the life of the culture. The differing
and historically changing conditions of artistic success within individual media at any historical
moment is the primary topic of Part III, where the focus is more on medium-specific choices of
materials, subject matters, and modes of organization than it is on the salience for joint social life
of a medium of art as a whole. Hence it is generally wise to read Part II and Part III in relation
to each other, bearing in mind that Hegel thinks both that particular media of art are culturally
most salient during distinctive historical epochs and that artistic achievement is also possible in any
medium at any time, in changing, historically and medially specific ways.
Hegel begins his account of the history of art by focusing on uses of artifacts––towers in Persia
such as the Tower of Babel and Indian phallic lingams––in more or less religious rituals. In constructing
these objects and developing rites centered around them, human beings are reflecting
on what is divine and most deserves human allegiance, but in a relatively abstract, contentless,
and hence inadequate way. Such religious, ritual practices are part of a kind of pre-history of art
that makes manifest the seriousness of the more explicitly artistic practices that will subsequently
develop out of them.
Human beings then turn their ritualistic intentions to the construction of massive stone
objects––the Egyptian pyramids––as foci for worship and reverence. This turn is altogether
Hegel on Sculpture and Painting
369
compatible with, and in fact explicitly rests on, the fact that not all are free and that masters
command slaves to undertake the required massive building projects, for human beings have not
yet understood freedom as an ultimate value. Their conception of the divine remains still relatively
contentless or what Hegel terms Symbolic. “The pyramids put before our eyes the simple
prototype of symbolical art itself; they are the prodigious crystals which conceal in themselves an
inner meaning …; the shape for an inner meaning remains just an external form and veil.”10 When
human beings are represented, for example, in bas-reliefs, on sarcophagi, or as guardian figures at
entrances, the human figure is
So represented that it still has the inner element of subjectivity outside itself, and cannot unfold
itself into free beauty. Especially remarkable are those colossal statues of Memnon which,
resting in themselves, motionless, the arms glued to the body, the feet firmly fixed together,
numb, stiff, and lifeless, are set up facing the sun in order to await its ray to touch them and
given them soul and sound. … [Here] the inner life of the human form is still dumb.11
Egyptian sculpture “has not yet overcome the breach between meaning and object;” there is a
“lack of inner, creative freedom … [and of ] the grace and vivacity that result from the properly
organic sweep of the lines.”12
In contrast, in roughly 5th-century BCE Greece, the conditions of life are very different, so
that the free unfolding of beauty in sculpture is both possible and apt to those new conditions.
“The Greeks,” as Hegel would have it, “in their immediate real existence lived in the happy
milieu of both self-conscious subjective freedom and the ethical substance.”13 According to this
understanding, at least (and only) Greek male property owners above a certain level immediately
felt mutual recognition and identification with their social status and roles. For at least these happy
few, Spirit was at home in the world; the human need for recognition and continuing identification
with one’s way of life was significantly satisfied. Hence the art that is appropriate to this new
situation is no longer abstract, symbolic, and lifeless, but instead presented what Michael Podro
calls an “image of man’s sense of his own situation [that] brought forth a response of recognition
from the depth of consciousness.”14
According to Hegel, it is in sculpture in particular that
Spiritual inwardness … makes itself at home in the sensuous shape and its external material…
[Here] insofar as … both sides [––formed material and represented content––] are so mutually
formed that neither preponderates, sculpture acquires the classical art-form as its fundamental type
and “forms the center of classical art.”15 “Nothing,” Hegel tells us, “can be or become more beautiful.”
16 In sculpture, “spirit so forms this externality that it is present to itself in it and recognizes
in it the appropriate shape of its own inner life.”17
Sculpture does this––presents reflection on life as satisfied by existing modes of life––by presenting
the divine, or what is worth reverence, in human form, where the human form is itself
calm and undisturbed in a way that figuratively presents achieved and stable satisfaction. In statues
of the Greek gods, we see “the Divine as such in its infinite peace and sublimity, timeless, immobile,
without purely subjective personality and the discord of actions and situations.”18 Here in the
human body in marble,
Spirit makes itself living likewise in this reality appropriate to itself, it glints in it, pervades
it and through it becomes manifest to others. … In its shape and structure [the human body]
declare[s] itself as likewise the sensuous and natural existence of the spirit. … The external
human form is alone capable of revealing the spiritual in a sensuous way.19
Richard Eldridge
370
Rutter describes the particular appropriateness of a human god for Greek sculpture and its signif-icance in relation to Greek life in observing that
A content that is pure universality—God, light—is nearly impossible to sculpt. One that is pure particularity—a bust of an ordinary Athenian—is not worth sculpting. … But Apollo’s divinity outstrips neither the corporeal form of sculpture (his godliness just is his physical perfection) nor its stillness (Apollo’s identity is not bound up with any particular story about his life).20
In Apollo’s sculpted human form, divinity is at rest and at home in the world, thus discharging “the chief task of sculpture, [which] is to present the peaceful divine image in its blessed perfec-tion without any inner struggle, … in beautiful, simple, inactive repose in no specific situation.”21
Hegel describes several statues by Phidias (c. 480–430 BCE), Polyclitus (5th century BCE), Myron (480–440 BCE), Praxiteles (c. early 4th century BCE), and Scopas (c. 395–350 BCE). He saw some of these works in the collections in the Louvre and in Dresden (sometimes as plaster copies), and he knew others from descriptions given by Winckelmann and Pliny. He describes the Phidias Dresden Zeus as “benign in his majesty,” and he notes that while “Bacchus has more youthful beauty and delicacy of form; Apollo is more manly but has no beard.” 22 Juno has “the greatest majesty in form and expression. Her large rounded eyes are proud and commanding; her mouth is similar and it at once makes her recognizable, especially when seen in profile.”23 “Venus aris[es] from her bath, conscious of her powers, quietly looking into the distance.”24 “Praise,” he writes, “comes back ever anew to the figure of the recumbent river-god [Ilissos, in the Elgin Marbles, from the west pediment of the Parthenon, ascribed to Phidias] which is amongst the most beautiful things preserved to us from antiquity.”25
Not only is the subject matter––the divine at rest in human form––determined by the needs and character of Greek life (for the male aristocratic few), so are the materials and the manner of presentation. “Marble in its soft purity, whiteness, absence of colour, and the delicacy of its sheen harmonizes in the most direct way with the aim of sculpture.” In contrast, “the darker vaguer co-lour, the sheen, the smoothness of bronze, … the most widespread and favourite material [among the Greeks], … lacks in general the abstractness of white marble, but it is, as it were, warmer” and possesses “infinite malleability and, as it were, fluidity.” Nonetheless, it is marble that “through its granular character and the gentle infusion of light” best permits a kind of shining forth of em-bodied divine subjectivity through the material.26 Here Hegel’s preference for marble over bronze (following Winckelmann) makes clear that he is not simply describing what was mostly done in making sculptures in Greece, but instead evaluating which works best fulfill the fundamental aims of Greek art.
This selective, descriptive-normative treatment on Hegel’s part extends to the topics of sculp-tural form, color, and decoration. In the most successful sculptures of children and youths,
The straight line that goes on and on, abstract even surfaces, and rigidly geometrical curves are avoided everywhere, and instead there is elaborated in the most beautiful way the living variety of lines and forms in the nuances linking their transitions together. … The bound-aries of the forms flow into one another rather unnoticeably and they fade into one another so delicately that, as Winckelmann says … one might compare them with the surface of a sea unruffled by the winds, of which one could say that although it is in constant motion it is nevertheless calm.27
In contrast, “statues of grown men” will present “distinctions more markedly” in order to indicate an achieved typical moral character, such as “developed bodily strength and courage.”28 Yet in
Hegel on Sculpture and Painting
371
all successful Greek sculptures of both young and old, “the serenity of delight remains common
to them all, a joy and a blissful indifference in soaring away above everything particular.”29 Unlike
the Egyptians, “in their sculptures … the Greeks release the arms and legs from the body,”
whether in motion or in repose, while nonetheless presenting a figure that “remains self-enclosed
and has its warrant in itself.”30 The need for self-enclosure and repose on the part of figure explains
why successful Greek sculpture must lack “the iris and glance expressive of [the] spirit” of
a distinctively individualized personality. Instead, “spiritual life is effused over the entirety of the
sculptural form.”31
Though the Greeks frequently painted their statues and decorated them with gold, jewels, or
ivory, these adornments are not necessary for a fully sculptural effect and may even be inimical
to it. In an unpainted marble sculpture, “the mildness of the color corresponds to the purpose of
sculpture, namely to express that which is calm, naïve, ideal.”32 “The purer artistic taste became,
the more did it ‘give up that display of colour which was inappropriate to it.’”33 Here it is clear,
again, that Hegel’s point is not simply descriptive-historical. As Stephen Houlgate aptly puts it,
“Hegel’s assertion that ideal sculpture lacks both color and seeing eyes is not an ill-founded historical
claim. It is a claim about what is proper to and so specifically sculptural about sculpture.”34
The ideal sculpture––ideal both in relation to Greek life and as exemplifying the highest
achievements of sculpture as such––for Hegel is thus an unpainted and undecorated marble statue
of a Greek god in human form, presenting the god at rest, but in a fluidly free stance, with
smoothly modulated contours, without delineated eye sockets, and with a calmly abstract and
somewhat distantly directed gaze. Phidias in particular excels in making such statues and so in
reflecting back to mid-5th-century B.C.E. Greeks what they took to be the highest and most
meaningful mode of human life.
For reasons that are both internal to the artistic practice and experience of sculpture and sociohistorically
external, however, sculpture inevitably declines from this high point of achievement.
Within the practice of sculpture, artists find themselves increasingly moved by what Hegel calls “a
craving to please”35 an audience that demands increasingly particularized detail and subject matter.
Instead of statues of gods in moments of calm, sculptors begin to depict “delightful situations” and
“fleeting moments,” such as “the sports of Eros,” dice-playing, or “the boy plucking a thorn from
his foot.”36 As the subject matters taken up become more pluralized and particularized, sculptors
begin to turn their attentions to bravura treatments of incidental details such as “little independent
miniatures, decoration, ornaments, dimples on the cheeks, graceful coiffures, smiles, robes variously
draped,… [and] poses that are striking and difficult,” so that the sculptures become merely
pleasing and agreeable, with “their essential purpose solely in relation to the spectator or reader,”
where they “flatter the person for whom they have been devised.”37 Hence “the ideal passes over
from loftiness to what is pleasing and delicate, to cheerfulness and a coaxing gracefulness.”38
As both cause and effect of this development––the spiritual and the sociohistorical are always in
reciprocal interaction, according to Hegel––ethical solidarity in common attachment to Periclean
ideals wanes, and individualism, setting individual judgment against the state, waxes. Socrates
exemplifies this development on the political side, according to Hegel, insofar as he “claims to be
free not only in the state as the substantial whole, … but in his own heart,” against a background
of a state already degenerating into “vanity, self-interest, and the licentiousness of democracy
and demagogy.”39 Similarly, Hegel reads the opposed one-sided insistence of Antigone (familial
duty) and Creon (civic order) in Sophocles’ Antigone as symptoms of an irresistibly emerging
individualism.
More forcefully, the ethical solidarity of the Periclean Golden Age of Athens had to disappear––
in principle, it could not hold the allegiance of all––insofar as its benefits and entitlements
were restricted to male property owners and insofar as it failed to give scope to more diverse
and articulated forms of individual meaning-making within supportive and stable social settings.
Richard Eldridge
372
Freedom as being meaningfully “with oneself in another”40––the dominant value for Hegel and a value that is progressively instantiated and modified dialectically in history––itself requires the fragmentation and replacement of Periclean solidarity and the introduction of some degrees of inwardness and individualism. Hence, the classical sculpture of Phidias that was so well suited to expressing and reinforcing Periclean ideals is also defective when measured against the actual, true, emerging interests of Spirit.
The classical form of art has attained [especially in sculpture] the pinnacle of what illustration [of the interests of spirit] by art could achieve, and if there is something defective in it, the defect is just art itself and the restrictedness of the sphere of art. This restrictedness lies in the fact that art in general takes as its subject-matter the spirit … in a sensuously concrete form, and classical art presents the complete unification of spiritual and sensuous existence as the correspondence of the two. But in this blending of the two, spirit is not in fact represented in its true nature. For spirit is the infinite subjectivity of the Idea [of freedom], which as absolute inwardness cannot freely and truly shape itself outwardly on condition of remaining moulded into a bodily existence as the one appropriate to it.41
Hence “art, considered in its highest vocation [of expressing most adequately the interests of spirit, as that vocation is achieved in Greek sculpture] is and remains for us a thing of the past.”42 There of course can be and are sculptures made in post-Periclean Greek life and on throughout history into the present. Hegel is particularly impressed with the sculptures of Dürer and Michelangelo. Post-Greek sculptures remain, however, primarily either “an adornment of architecture”43 or treatments of themes (the love of the Madonna for the Child, the Crucifixion) that are better treated in painting. Hegel of course did not know modern, abstract sculpture. But here, too, while there can be striking and imaginative works that provoke thought, none of them will match the achievement of Classical Greek sculpture in sensuously expressing the interests of spirit and the idea of freedom. As Houlgate aptly puts it, contemporary abstract sculptures “do not directly embody concrete human freedom or organic life, but are invented, constructed shapes that simply ‘stimulate thought… and arouse general ideas’ [with an ultimately mute opacity] not unlike the symbolic constructions of the ancient world.”44 It is, perhaps, an open question whether any such abstract works can achieve or have achieved anything like the depth of address to socially lived possibilities of meaningful life that is distinctively manifest in Greek sculpture.
In contrast with sculpture that is, according to Hegel, “predominantly independent on its own account, unconcerned about the spectator who can place himself wherever he likes” in viewing it and with a content that is “self-reposing, self-complete, and objective,” painting
Reveals its purpose as existing not independently on its own account but for subjective appre-hension, for the spectator. The spectator is as it were in it from the beginning, is counted in with it, and the work exists only for this fixed point, i.e. for the individual apprehending it.45
That is to say that a painting, or at least a representational painting using fixed-point perspective, assumes a single spectator’s viewpoint directly opposite the painting’s vanishing point. In so do-ing, as Michael Podro observes, a painting gives us “something seen from a particular viewpoint, and being seen from a specific viewpoint … becomes a theme within the painting. The fact that it is being seen from a given viewpoint is part of its content.”46 In general, according to Hegel,
The truth of art cannot be mere correctness, to which the so-called imitation of nature is restricted; on the contrary, the outer must harmonize with an inner which is harmonious in itself, and, just on that account, can reveal itself as itself in the outer.47
Hegel on Sculpture and Painting
373
In landscape painting in particular, for example, success is not simply a matter of the depiction of
the relative spatial positions of the objects composing a natural scene, but instead a matter of producing
“moods in our heart which correspond to the moods of nature” so that the “life of nature
re-echoes in our soul and heart.”48
Second, the number of objects the appearance of which a painting can present for apprehension
by the spectator is vastly multiplied in comparison with the single object or a small number of
objects that a sculpture presents. From a still life that may depict myriad goblets, serving trays,
trussed fowls, grapes, cream pitchers, lemon slices, and so on to a wider angle landscape painting
that may present multiple human figures, mountainous backgrounds, groups of buildings, whole
cities as seen from afar, and so on, “it is possible for the painter to bring within the sphere of his
presentations a wealth of objects that remain inaccessible to sculpture.”49
As a result of the compositional grouping of multiple objects seen from a point of view, the
viewer of a painting is forced to consider why the objects are thus grouped or what they have to
do with each other. For the depiction of human beings, in particular, this will mean that “the
grouping of [the] figures indicates their activity in a specific situation” so that they are presented in
relation to their “variegated external surrounding” and in “dramatic liveliness” (even if their mode
of action is quiet reflection on their situation).50 “What,” the viewer must ask, are these objects
doing here?” and for human figures in particular, “what are the beliefs, desires, commitments,
experiences, and so forth that have put them in this situation?” Representational paintings hence
essentially imply a narrative that must be imagined by the spectator, though they typically do not
(unless they are diptychs, triptychs, or otherwise multi-panel) present the unfolding of multiple
events over time.
Not only is an implied narrative presented as to be imagined by the viewer, who must reconstruct
from the visual appearances of the figures (or other objects) and from the title or other
contextual information the motivating reasons (for human figures: the passions, desires, beliefs,
etc.) that explain the grouping, painting also, as Hegel puts it, “restricts” or “dissolve[s] … the independence
of the actual spatially present existent” by presenting only a two-dimensional appearance
of an object, or something to be seen in the paint on canvas, rather than something existing
on its own. In this way, there is a kind of natural use of the medium of paint on canvas (or other
support), presenting two-dimensional appearances, to solicit imaginative activity on the parts of
viewers who reconstruct what is going on from what they see.
Strikingly, Hegel then argues, this makes painting, unlike sculpture, distinctively appropriate
to subjectivity’s reflection on its possibilities of meaningful life in the new Roman-
Christian world. In contrast with Greek socioethical life, this new world is characterized by a
more strongly felt sense of inwardness [Innerlichkeit]. This sense is both nurtured and expressed
by Roman commercial law, where individuals participating in legally enforceable commercial
transactions may typically hide motives, commitments, and pieces of knowledge from others
with whom they are making contracts, and by Christianity, with its sense of inner resources
for radical conversion to new religious commitments. In the life of Spirit or of the forming
and testing of normative commitments for the sake of meaningful life, there is, as Hegel puts
it, “something higher than the appearance of spirit in its immediate sensible form”51: namely
that individuals should freely create and participate in distinctively divergent but also mutually
intelligible and endorsable social roles. This will require the continuing activity, driven by
inwardness or subjectivity, of the creation and revision of social roles under conditions of conflict,
where the result, as Hegel will ultimately have it, is a kind of fortunate fall from the more
immediate and naïve meaningful way of life of (some) Greeks. Unlike sculpture, painting in its
ability to present subjects-in-interaction within richly significant settings and from a point of
view that surveys them, is best suited to express and embody what human beings now hold to
be most important to them.
Richard Eldridge
374
Painting … opens the way for the first time to the principle of finite and inherently [in sich: implicit, not yet developed] infinite subjectivity, the principle of our own life and existence, and in paintings we see what is effective and active in ourselves.52
According to Hegel, there are then two paradigm cases of painting that distinctively succeeds in presenting living, active human subjects engaged in what they take to be meaningful life: Italian Renaissance religious painting of roughly the 15th and 16th centuries, and Dutch-Flemish paint-ing of the 17th century. In both cases, the subject matter is not simply human subjects at home within meaningful ethico-social life in the world. Instead, in religious paintings, in particular, we see human beings in situations in which
The soul has worked its way through its feelings and powers and the whole of its inner life, i.e. that it has overcome much, suffered grief, endured anguish and pain of soul, and yet in this disunion has preserved its integrity and withdrawn out of itself into itself.53
Paradigmatically, this inward acceptance of a difficult situation and achievement of integrity are ex-emplified by Mary in her love for Jesus, whether in her acceptance of the Annunciation, in her gaze at the infant on her lap, or her resolute, composed sorrow at the removal of the body from the cross. Her “ardor [Innigkeit]” in playing her part in loving Jesus shows itself in her face and bearing.”54
What depth of feeling, what spiritual life, what inner wealth of profound emotion, what sublimity and charm, what a human heart, though one wholly penetrated by the divine Sprit, does not speak to us out of every line of these pictures [of the great Italian masters]. … It is the inner life of the spirit which undertakes to express itself as inner in the mirror of externality.55
Or in scenes of the Passion, in “the mockery, the crowns of thorns, the Ecce Homo, the carrying of the cross, the Crucifixion, the Descent from the Cross, the Entombment, etc.,” 56 we see Jesus in pain and sorrow, but also in what Hegel calls his bliss in the fulfillment of his vocation, in his “unity with self in spite of all the self-surrender.”57
Technically, Hegel for both Italian Renaissance and Dutch painting stresses the importance of coloring, and in particular coloring using oils, over design in establishing a convincing pictorial space into which viewers can see imaginatively. In contrast with egg-based tempera, which dries quickly and relatively monochromatically, oil painting “not only permits the most delicate and soft fusion and shading of colors, … but it also acquires … by means of the glazes it can produce … a translucency of different layers of colour.”58 The use of color in oils to set up an illuminated, modulated, translucent depth space gives an oil painting an effect of shining from within that, especially when the painting is large enough, seems to surround viewers and invite them to ex-plore its pictorial depth. Hence, the absorption of the viewer in the pictorial space presented in oil mirrors the absorption of the paintings’ subjects in their activities and relationships.59 At the limit of the self-sustaining use of colour, in sfumato, in particular, the play of colors seems to set up a self-sustaining world of its own.
In general, it may be said that the magic consists in so handling all the colours that what emerges is an inherently objectless play of pure appearance which forms the extreme soaring pinnacle of colouring, a fusion of colours, a shining of reflections upon one another become so fine, so fleeting, so expressive of the soul that they begin to pass over into the sphere of music.60
In addition to sfumato, the smooth modulation of shining colors in oil with glazes is able to present “atmospheric perspective” or effects of relative distance in addition to those of linear perspective,
Hegel on Sculpture and Painting
375
especially in landscape painting, by having stronger color contrasts and sharper contours in the foreground
and weaker contrasts and more diffuse contours for figures in the background.61 Finally, citing
Diderot’s remark in his posthumously published 1796 Essay on Painting that “The man who has
got the feel of flesh has already gone far. Everything else is nothing in comparison,” Hegel adds that
The summit of colouring, … as it were, … is ‘carnation’, the colour tone of human flesh
which unites all other colours marvelously without giving independent emphasis to either
one or another. The youthful and healthy red of the cheeks is pure carmine without any dash
of blue, violet, or yellow; but this red is itself only a gloss, or rather a shimmer, which seems to
press outwards from within and then shades off unnoticeably into the rest of the flesh-colour,
although this latter is an ideal inter-association of all the fundamental colours.62
Given the importance for successful painting of depicting human subjects in full absorption in
activity or at least in fully manifested distinctive subjectivity, the portrait is an especially central
form for painting. “Since among the visual arts painting is the one which most of all allows to
the particular figure and its special character the right to emerge independently, the transition to
portraiture proper lies especially near its nature.”63 But here too, as in landscape painting, the aim
is not simply exact imitation. Rather “the spiritual character of the subject must be emphasized
and made predominant … by treating and emphasizing precisely those traits and parts in which
this spiritual special character is expressed most clearly, pregnantly, and vividly.”64 Titian was,
according to Hegel, “the greatest master in this art,” 65 in particular “in the wealth of natural
life, and the illuminating shading, glow, warmth, and power of colouring” in his portraits.66 In
general, “the perfection of painting in these great masters”––Giotto, Titian, Correggio, Raphael,
Leonardo, and Michelangelo––“is a peak of art which can be ascended only once by one people
in the course of history’s development.”67
In contrast with Italian Renaissance painting with its predominantly religious subject matter,
Flemish-Dutch painting of the 17th century (Van Dyck, Ostade, Rembrandt, Steen, Ter Borch,
Teniers), the second high-point of modern painting, focuses on scenes of daily life. According to
Hegel, these painters find
Joy in the world as such, [in] natural objects and their detailed appearance, [in] domestic life
in its decency, cheerfulness, and quiet seclusion as well as [in] national celebrations, festivals,
and processions, [in] country dances, and the enjoyment and the jollities and boisterousness
of wakes-weeks.68
They depict “utterly living absorption in the world and its daily life.”69 As with landscape painting
and with portraiture, however, the artistic interest and truth of these paintings are not simply a matter
of imitation or exact copying. Instead, Flemish-Dutch painters undertake to “grasp this most
transitory and fugitive material, and to give it permanence for our contemplation in the fullness
of its life.”70 Dutch painters in particular are masters at rendering in paint human figures who display
“joy and exuberance in their own sense that for all this”––the routines of daily life and of the
round of the year––“they have their own activity to thank,” specifically the activities of reclaiming
land from the sea by building dikes and of expelling the Spanish from their country through the
Eighty Years War (1568–1648).71 Despite “what otherwise is the poverty and accidental character”
of the scenes depicted––the pulling of teeth, the fetching of water, quiet reading, or dancing at
weddings––we see in these pictures that the Dutch live with an achieved and expressed sense that
The right thing is simply to fulfil every task, no matter how trivial, with heart and soul. …
Consequently, the interest we may take in [such] pictures … does not lie in the objects
Richard Eldridge
376
themselves, but in this soul of life which in itself, apart altogether from the thing in which it proves to be living, speaks to every uncorrupt mind and free heart.72
In addition to or beyond the activities and attitudes that are depicted, however, there are also places in Dutch painting, particularly in the treatment of “external details,” where our interest fastens on “the extreme of pure appearance” that the painter has achieved, on “the point where the content does not matter and where the chief interest is in the artistic creation of that appearance.”73
In supreme art we see the fixed the most fleeting appearance of the sky, the time of day, the lighting of the trees; the appearances and reflections of clouds, waves, lochs, streams; the shimmering and glittering of wine in a glass, a flash of the eye, a momentary look or smile, etc. … With what skill have the Dutch painted the lustre of satin gowns with all the manifold reflections and degrees of shadow in the folds, etc., and the sheen of silver, gold, copper, glass vessels, velvet, etc.74
Yet even here the achievement is not simply that of sheer exactness of depiction, but rather a matter of “a spiritually rich industry which perfects each detail independently and yet retains the whole connected and flowing together.”75 A scene––whether a still life, portrait, figure group-ing, or landscape painting––is presented in such a way that the viewer’s attention is held all at once by the manifold details of the painting, their integrated unity, the handling of the paint, and the expression (by either human figures or the implied attention of the painter) of emotions and attitudes. As Rutter usefully notes, in the modern painting of daily life, the fit between the subject matter and form is “looser” and “more dynamic” than it is in Classical sculpture, and the active attention of the viewing audience is divided between the subjects depicted and the painter’s absorption in handling the paint, the subject matter, and the composition in just this way.76 Fred Rush interestingly remarks that Dutch painting “is superior to all other forms of art in terms of its reflexivity. It is, simply put, painting about painting.”77 This somewhat overstates the point, but the insight that our attention is held by the composition, the handling of the paint, and the painter’s attitudes and intelligence––what Rutter calls, picking up on Hegel’s terminology, the painting’s subjective liveliness [subjective Lebendigkeit]––is surely right. Or, as Hegel puts it, we are captivated by “the love, the mind and spirit, the soul, with which the artist seizes on [common-place subjects], makes them his own, and so breathes his own inspiration of production as a new life into what he creates.78
As with the decline of the significance of Greek sculpture into a variety of subject matters un-der the pressures of the increasing urbanization and commercialization of Hellenic life, painting, too, declines from its high points of Italian Renaissance religious painting and the Dutch painting of daily life. As modern life develops, the subjects of painting become increasingly pluralized:
The realm of nature outside us, human life down to the most fleeting aspects of situations and characters––each and everything of this can win a place in painting. For to subjectivity there [now] also belongs what is particular, arbitrary, and contingent in human interests and needs, and these therefore equally press for treatment in art.79
As a result, as with the supplantation of sculpture by painting as the central form of art, painting, too, along with the other modern forms of art of music and poetry, is now supplanted by first religion and then philosophy as the central cultural forms for articulating and representing what human beings hold highest. “The culmination of the romantic in general [––Hegel’s term for modern or post-medieval life]–– … brings home to our minds that we must acquire higher forms for the apprehension of truth than those which art is in a position to supply.”80 The adequate
Hegel on Sculpture and Painting
377
representation of human life as free and meaningful under complex modern social, economic,
and institutional forms requires more abstraction than concretely sensuous works of art are able
to supply.
Yet just as sculptures, including important and successful ones, continued to be produced after
sculpture’s high point in 5th-century BCE Greece, so too important and successful paintings continue
to be produced as well. Even if it is unable to portray what is highest,
Individual talent … can remain faithful both to the manifestations of spirit and also to the
inherently substantial life of nature, even in the extreme limits of the contingency which
that life reaches, and can make significant even what is in itself without significance, and this
it does through … fidelity, … the marvelous skill of the portrayal, … [and] the subjective
vivacity with which the artist with his spirit and heart breathes life entirely into the existence
of such topics.81
Beyond the Dutch painting of everyday life, one might think of Cezanne’s apples or the scrupulously
but self-consciously drawn still lifes of Giorgio Morandi or the stylized paintings of antelope
skulls by Georgia O’Keefe.82
One might well wonder about Hegel’s accounts of sculpture and painting, as John Sallis does,
whether “the differentiation of the forms of art [Symbolic, Classical, and Romantic] also provide[s],
as Hegel insists, ‘the fundamental principle for the articulation and determination of the individual
arts’”83 and of the necessary and sufficient historical conditions for success within them. What
is Hegel to say about abstract sculpture (Brancusi, Caro, Smith, and all the rest), abstract painting
(Pollock, Hofmann, Rothko, Louis, and all the rest), and environmental art (Smithson, Christo),
not to mention video art, installation art, and conceptual art? Can it really be true that media of
art and the conditions of success within them rise and fall in tandem with changes in forms of
sociohistorical life that themselves conform to some more or less scrutable ‘logic of freedom?’
Whatever the answers to these questions may be, it is nonetheless the case that the high points
of artistic achievement in sculpture and painting that Hegel identifies are high points that remain
in their combinations of subject matters, forms, and materials central axes of orientation for both
artistic practices and thinking about the arts. In this respect, Hegel has done as much as anyone
to shape a widely shared sense of the history of art. Second, sculpture and painting can be and
are ways of achieving and embodying, in sensuous form and for absorbed engagement, serious
thoughts about significant experiences and modes of life that may be widely shared. Or as Pippin
puts it in commenting on Hegel’s use of the term “theoretical” [theoretisch] to describe art in general,
by theoretisch Hegel “means a still sensible and affective recognition of lived dimensions of human subjectivity
in their ‘liveliness’.”84 If this is right and sculpture and painting can continue to afford such
recognitions, then they retain considerable importance as serious modes of thought about life,
and Hegel’s accounts of the high points of achievement of sensuously embodied thought within
these modes will continue to have orienting force for the practices of art––perhaps especially so
when, as Hegel surprisingly remarks, both philosophy and modern life remain “burdened with
abstraction.”85
Notes
1 Robert B. Pippin notes that according to Hegel forcing a choice between a descriptive “logic of discovery”
and an evaluative “logic of justification” is “a choice between false alternatives” in that ideals relevant
to practices, artistic and otherwise, are essentially partially realized within the relevant practices.
(Pippin, After the Beautiful: Hegel and the Philosophy of Pictorial Modernism [Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2014, p. 18].)
2 Ibid., p. 133.
Richard Eldridge
378
3 Benjamin Rutter, Hegel on the Modern Arts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), p. 31.
4 Hegel, Lectures on Fine Art, trans. T. M. Knox (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), Vol. I, p. 8.
Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 31.
6 “In works of art the nations have deposited their richest inner intuitions and ideas [about meaning and value that organize their lives], and art is often the key, and in many nations the only key, for under standing their philosophy and religion” (Hegel, Lectures on Fine Arts), Vol. I, p. 7.
7 In Hegel’s Aesthetics: The Art of Idealism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019), Lydia L. Moland raises this worry before turning to the manifold elucidatory details about artistic achievement that Hegel puts forward.
8 One symptom of Hegel’s approach to the history and philosophy of art––arguably a virtue––is that he resolutely offers no theory of taste or theory of the justification of judgments about the artistic value of individual works, taken one by one. The need for such a theory of taste is absorbed and supplanted by Hegel’s broad story about how major works have served essentially collective, historical human interests. On this point, see Pippin, “The Absence of Aesthetics in Hegel’s Aesthetics,” in The Cambridge Com panion to Hegel and 19th Century Philosophy, ed. Frederick C. Beiser (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), pp. 394–418, at pp. 394–395.
9 The titles and the general organization of the posthumously published 1830 Lectures on Fine Art are due as much or more to the editor of those Lectures, H. G. Hotho, as to Hegel himself.
10 Hegel, Lectures on Fine Art, Vol. I, p. 356.
11 Ibid., Vol. 1, p, 358.
12 Ibid., p. Vol. II, pp. 784, 781, 782. Here Hegel follows J. J. Winckelmann’s 1764 History of the Art of Antiquity
13 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 436.
14 Michael Podro, The Critical Historians of Art (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1982), pp. 21–22.
15 Hegel, Lectures on Fine Art, Vol. I, pp. 85, 517.
16 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 718.
17 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 710.
18 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 712.
19 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 715, Vol. I, p. 433.
20 Rutter, Hegel on the Modern Arts, p. 88.
21 Hegel, Lectures on Fine Art, Vol. II, p. 740, Vol. II, p. 766.
22 Ibid., Vol. II p. 762.
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 202.
25 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 724.
26 Ibid., Vol. II, pp. 776, 774, 776.
27 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 756.
28 Ibid., Vol. II, pp. 756, 757.
29 Ibid., p. 757.
30 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 201.
31 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 732.
32 Hegel, Vorlesung über Ästhetik: Berlin 1820/21, ed. Helmut Schneider (Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1995), p. 235; cited in Stephen Houlgate, “Hegel on the Beauty of Sculpture,” in Hegel and the Arts, ed. Stephen Houlgate (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2007), pp, 56–89, at p. 62; Houlgate’s translation.
33 Hegel, Lectures on Fine Art, Vol. II, p. 707, citing J. H. Meyer’s History of the Visual Arts in Greece (1824–1836).
34 Houlgate, “Hegel on the Beauty of Sculpture,” p. 64.
35 Hegel, Vorlesung über Ästhetik: Berlin 1820/21 p. 190; cited in ibid., p. 76; Houlgate’s translation.
36 Hegel, Lectures on Fine Art, Vol. II, p. 767.
37 Ibid., Vol. II, pp. 619, 618.
38 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 788.
39 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 510.
40 Hegel defines freedom using this formula in Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right, ed. Allen W. Wood., trans. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), §§ 7, 7A, p. 42.
41 Hegel, Lectures on Fine Art, Vol. I, p. 79; first emphasis added.
42 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 11.
43 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 789.
Hegel on Sculpture and Painting
379
380 DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-44
36
JOHN RUSKIN ON PAINTING AND
SCULPTURE
Paul Guyer
John Ruskin ( 1 819– 1 900) was the dominant writer on painting and architecture of Victorian
Britain ( he was born just three months before Queen Victoria and predeceased her by just one
year) and was also deeply influential in the United States. His views on painting were expressed
in the five volumes of Modern Painters published between 1843 and 1860 and in many other works,
and his views on architecture were chiefly stated in The Seven Lamps of Architecture ( 1849) and the
three volumes of The Stones of Venice ( 1 851– 1 853). He never addressed a full- l ength work to the
topic of sculpture, but sculpture is at the heart of “ The Nature of Gothic” in The Stones of Venice,
a chapter that is the centerpiece of the work and also the turning point in Ruskin’s career from art
criticism to the social criticism that occupied the last three decades of his productive life. Ruskin
did not explicitly connect his work to the great British tradition in aesthetics begun by the third
Earl of Shaftesbury and Francis Hutcheson and carried into the beginning of the 19th century
by such writers as David Hume, Edmund Burke, Henry Home Lord Kames, Alexander Gerard,
Thomas Reid, Archibald Alison, Dugald Stewart, and many others, as well as by the writers on
the “ picturesque” such as William Gilpin, Uvedale Price, and Richard Payne Knight, but his
work was nevertheless deeply influenced by this tradition. The leading concept of Ruskin’s criticism
was “ truth,” but this must be understood with two qualifications. First, following the N eo-
Platonist strand within British aesthetics represented above all by Shaftesbury and Reid, Ruskin
did not draw rigid distinctions among truth, beauty, and goodness, or the cognitive, perceptual,
and moral aspects of our response to art. And second, Ruskin’s conception of truth also included
what we might now distinguish as truthfulness, that is, the sincerity of the artist, as well as the
content of art and its cognitive significance. In what follows, these themes will be illustrated from
Ruskin’s work on painting, with a concluding comment on his views about sculpture as hinted at
in “ The Nature of Gothic.”
Ruskin was the only child of Scottish- b orn John James Ruskin, an increasingly wealthy wine
importer and merchant, and his devout wife ( and cousin) Margaret, an adherent of the Evangelical
branch of the Church of England. His parentage was both a blessing and a curse for their son. On
the one hand, their wealth afforded him education at home until he went up to Oxford; frequent
travel to both the great houses of England, his father’s customers, with their art collections, and
to continental Europe, including his first trip to Italy at 14; his father’s burgeoning art collection,
especially of works by the greatest British painter of the century, Joseph Mallord William Turner;
and a lifelong allowance and then inheritance that freed him from ever having to work for a living.
Ruskin’s education included extensive training in drawing and, at Oxford, studies in geology,
and he would become a truly gifted drawer and watercolorist of both nature and architecture in
John Ruskin on Painting and Sculpture
381
his own right. On the other hand, his parents had great expectations for him and put tremendous
pressure on him, for example his mother accompanying him to university and his father telling
him how to style his works even as late as The Stones of Venice, when the son was already in his
thirties. Unsurprisingly, Ruskin suffered bouts of depression as a young man, followed by long
spells of mental illness in his final decade of life. The Christianity of Ruskin’s parents remained a
deep influence on him until the age of 40, when his religious fervor began to be converted into the
social passion of many of his late works and activities. Ruskin’s only formal position was as the first
Slade Professor of Fine Art at Oxford from 1870 until 1884, and the Ruskin School of Fine Art
continues at Oxford until this day. As an executor of the estate of Turner, Ruskin also organized
the painter’s vast bequest of materials to the British nation, and lectured on art and society in many
venues, including a Working Man’s College, from the 1860s through the 1880s.
Ruskin’s major work on painting was done before his loss of religious faith. Modern Painters
concerns above all landscape painting, and its central tenet has been summed up thus:
Ruskin wished to show... that the works of nature expressed the same universal laws as those
contained in the Bible. He therefore set out to persuade an Evangelical audience that their
suspicion of visual pleasure was i ll- founded, and that beauty and the enjoyment of beauty was
a gift from God.... being a gift from God, beauty exists outside ourselves, and therefore [is]
not the result of the [mere] association of ideas.
(Hewison, 2009; 106–107)
In Ruskin’s own terms,
The power of every picture depends upon the penetration of the imagination into the TRUE
nature of the thing represented, and the utter scorn of the imagination for all shackles and
fetters of more external fact that stand in the way of its suggestiveness,
(Ruskin, 1903–1912; 4:278)
where the “ true nature” of things represented in turn reflects God’s benevolent will and the gift
of natural beauty to mankind. Ruskin’s view of art as expressing the true essence rather than superficial
appearance of nature certainly has historical antecedents— o ne thinks immediately of the
view of Charles Batteux a century earlier that beauty lies in the imitation of nature, but of la belle
nature, nature as we think it ought to be ( Batteux, 1746 [2015], Part I, Chapter 3, 13)— a nd it can
be separated from the view that the beauty of the essence of nature must be appreciated as the gift
of God, but at least for the younger Ruskin, these two premises were not separated.
Yet Ruskin’s approach to art is never reductionist, that is, he does not reduce all the sources
of our satisfaction in art to truth or any other single factor. As already suggested, his conception
of truth itself is bifold, including both some sort of cognitive or epistemic value under the rubric of
truth and the value of truthfulness or sincerity on the part of the artist, and while the general category
of truth in art can be conceptually distinguished from other values such as beauty and goodness,
these values are not separated in our actual experience of art. In the Synopsis to Volume I of
Modern Painters, Ruskin distinguished five sources of “ greatness in art”: “ ideas of power”; “ ideas of
imitation”; “ ideas of truth”; “ ideas of beauty”; and “ ideas of relation” ( Ruskin, 1 903– 1912; 3:56).
This list may be compared to Ruskin’s list of the seven “ lamps” of architecture, namely those of
“sacrifice,” “truth,” “power,” “beauty,” “life,” “memory,” and “obedience” (Ruskin, 1903–1912;
8:ix): while there are some differences between this list and the list of the sources of greatness in art
( sacrifice, for example, concerns the great cost in both money and labor of works of architecture
such as cathedrals, which Ruskin thinks befitting, but is not a topic in his account of painting),
some of the categories, such as “ truth,” “ power,” and “ beauty” are the same, as befits the fact
Paul
Guyer
382
that architecture, like painting, is a visual art, although it also involves further considerations,
obviously, such as utility. The categories of truth and beauty are especially important in Ruskin’s
account of painting, along with “ relation.” This is because by “ power” he means something like
artistry, the “ excellence” by means of which “ difficulty” in realizing artistic aims is overcome
( Ruskin, 1903– 1 912; 3: 96– 9 7), and this category is parasitic on the other categories of artistic
value. Ruskin also plays down the value of imitation insofar as it is a mere trick, trompe l’oeil, or
“ requires nothing more for its attainment than a true eye, a steady hand, and moderate industry”
( 3:103) as opposed to genuine insight. In other words, imitation concerns itself with the superficial
appearance, in particular the accumulation of the appearance of all the features of things without
any principled discrimination among them, rather than the essence of things. Insight into the real
essence of things through their depiction is the first independent value of art. This is what Ruskin
first captures under the rubric of truth. “ The word truth, as applied to art, signifies the faithful
statement, either to the mind or senses, of any fact of nature” ( 3:93). However, Ruskin’s use of the
word “ statement” has to be handled with care. He is not maintaining the truth of a work of art
consists in its communication of a proposition that corresponds to some fact, or more generally that
truth in painting consists in some isomorphic relation between sign and signified. Rather, what
Ruskin has in mind is that a “ true” painting vividly conveys the experience of what is essential to
its object. In a passage on “ Turnerian Topography” in the fourth volume of Modern Painters, he
states that the “ artist who has real invention”— that is, Turner— first
Receives a true impression from the place itself, and takes care to keep hold of that as his chief
good... and then sets himself as far as possible to reproduce that impression on the mind of
the spectator of his picture.
He continues that
The aim of the great inventive landscape painter must be to give the... higher and deeper
truth of mental vision, rather than that of the physical facts, and to reach a representation
which, though it may be totally useless to engineers or geographers, shall yet be capable of
producing on the far- a way beholder’s mind precisely the impression which the reality would
have produced, and putting his heart into the same state in which it would have been, had he
verily descended into the valley
that the painter had painted ( Ruskin, 1903– 1912; 6: 32– 39). Ruskin’s reference to the “ heart” as
well as the “ mind” of the audience for the work of art is important: he draws no rigid distinction
between the intellectual and emotional response to a work of art, but sees them as fully integrated.
Citing the same passage, I have elsewhere referred to Ruskin’s conception of truth in painting as
phenomenological rather than, say, semantic ( Guyer, 2014; 2:198), but that could be misleading
if it is taken in a purely perceptual sense— Ruskin’s point is that a “ true” work of art conveys the
emotional as well as perceptual experience of seeing real nature, but it does not do this through
any kind of p oint- b y- p oint imitation of the natural scene or object. That is why Turner’s later
paintings, with their great swirls of light rather than detailed objects or figures, or, to take an example
that came too late for Ruskin to notice, the f ull- b lown Impressionism of m id- c areer Monet
or Pissarro, can count as “ true” in Ruskin’s sense.
Indeed, although he never discussed French Impressionism, Ruskin does use the word
“ impression,” his point being that a great painting gives a faithful “ impression” or experience of
its object rather than an accurate rendition of it. He further explicates the means of such impression
as tone, color, chiaroscuro, and space and then illustrates these in application to the main
classes of objects depicted in landscape, namely the truth of skies, the truth of earth ( geology and
John Ruskin on Painting and Sculpture
383
topography), the truth of water, and the truth of vegetation. In all of these cases, his aim is to show
how veridical experiences of nature can be created through the means of painting. This passage
sums up his approach to “ truth”:
Go to the top of Highgate Hill on a clear summer morning at five o’clock, and look at Westminster
Abbey. You will receive an impression of a building enriched with multitudinous
vertical lines. Try to distinguish one of those lines all the way down from the one next to it:
You cannot.... Look at it generally, and it is all symmetry and arrangement. Look at it in all
its parts, and it is all inextricable confusion. Am I not, at this moment, describing a piece of
Turner’s drawing, with the same words by which I describe nature[?]
(Ruskin, 1903–1912; 3:336)
What Turner does, as Ruskin conceives of the truth of his painting, is to convey the experience of
seeing the object he painted, in its perceptual and emotional fullness and depth, without providing
an accurate rendition of his object the way a botanical illustration or architectural elevation might.
The remaining two sources of value in painting and other fine art for Ruskin are beauty and
what he calls “ relation.” He initially defines beauty in purely perceptual terms, and in a way
reminiscent of Francis Hutcheson’s definition of “ absolute” beauty from 1725 ( Hutcheson, 1725
[2008]; Treatise I, Section 1, paragraph XIV, 25):
Any material object which can give us pleasure in the simple contemplation of its outward
qualities without any direct and definite exertion of the intellect, I call in some way, or in
some degree, beautiful. Why we receive pleasure from some forms and colors, and not from
others, is no more to be asked or answered than why we like sugar and dislike wormwood.
(Ruskin, 1903–1912; 3:109)
This would seem to draw a rigid boundary between beauty and truth in painting or any other art.
However, Ruskin quickly qualifies this statement by stating that he does not “ mean by excluding
direct exertion of the intellect from ideas of beauty, to assert that beauty has no effect upon nor
connection with the intellect.” He continues
All our moral feelings are so interwoven with our intellectual powers, that we cannot affect
the one without in some degree addressing all the others; and in all high ideas of beauty, it
is more than probable that much of the pleasure depends on delicate and untraceable perceptions
of fitness, propriety, and relation, which are purely intellectual, and through which we
arrive at our noblest ideas of what is commonly and rightly called “ intellectual beauty.”
This in turn leads to a statement of the theological orientation that grounded Ruskin’s aesthetics
in 1843:
Ideas of beauty are among the noblest which can be presented to the human mind, invariably
exalting and purifying it according to their degree; and it would appear that we are intended
by the Deity to be constantly under their influence, because there is not one single object in
nature,
or the artistic representation thereof, “ which is not capable of conveying them” ( Ruskin, 1903–
1912; 1 10– 1 11). Here Ruskin treats the human mind as a unity in which the perceptual aspects of
experience are inseparable from the intellectual ones, even if they may be distinguished for the
sake of conceptual analysis. In any experience of nature or of the painting of nature pleasure in
Paul
Guyer
384
colors and forms is inseparable from pleasure in thought, ultimately thought leading up to the idea
of the goodness of God from whom nature is a gift to us.
The theological orientation of Ruskin’s thought is still evident in a further distinction that he
introduces in Modern Painters II, that between “ typical” and “ vital” beauty. This is reminiscent
of David Hume’s distinction between the beauty of “species” or visible form and the beauty of
the appearance of functionality ( Hume 1 739– 1740 [2007]; Book III, Part III, Section 5, 393). For
Ruskin, typical beauty is “ that external quality of bodies... which, whether it occur in a stone,
flower, beast, or in man, is absolutely identical,” and which is called “ typical” because it “ may be
shown to be in some sort typical of the Divine attributes,” while vital beauty is “ the appearance of
felicitous fulfillment of function in living things, more especially of the joyful and right exertion
of the perfect life in man” ( Ruskin, 1903– 1912; 4:64). Thus, all forms of perceptible beauty in
nature and their depiction in art can be considered images of divine perfections, so perception and
intellection are in their case clearly intertwined, and for a religious mind, the pleasing appearance
of functionality throughout nature including human nature is also obviously a gift of God.
In Modern Painters II Ruskin draws a further distinction among forms of imagination, which
may be considered his refinement of the 18th- century conception of genius as the condition of the
possibility of art. He divides imagination into “ associative,” “ penetrative,” and “ contemplative.”
“ Imagination associative” is the source of what earlier philosophers such as Locke and Burke
called the association of ideas, to which everyone is prone, and which can be quite superficial
connections. “ Imagination penetrative” is the artist’s power to grasp parts and form them into
a whole that is more illustrative of the real experience of nature than is any mere delineation;
“ whatever material” this form of imagination “ receives, it instantly so arranges that it comes right;
all things falls into their place and appear in that place perfect, useful, and evidently not to be
spared” ( Ruskin, 1903– 1912; 4:241). “ Imagination penetrative” gets beneath the surface of nature
to its essence
It never stops at crusts or ashes, or outward images of any kind, it ploughs them all aside and
plunges into the very central fiery heart, whatever semblances and various outward shows the
subject may possess... all that it affirms, judges, or describes, it affirms from within.
(Ruskin, 1903–1912; 4:250–251)
The opening of this passage suggests that the imagination penetrative penetrates the outward
appearance of nature to reveal some essence within nature, while the conclusion suggests that the
imagination penetrative reveals the core of the human response to nature. Here Ruskin seems to be
talking about truth as much as beauty: this form of imagination reveals deep truths about the laws
and energies of nature and deep truths about the passions and motivations of human nature and
of course deep truths about the divine that grounds both of the foregoing. Finally, “ imagination
contemplative” is the function of imagination by which the truths grasped by the prior two forms
of imagination are fixed in memorable form: this is the special gift of the artist, which Ruskin
illustrates with examples from poetry, Milton’s renditions of Death and Satan ( 4:249), before going
on to painting, about which he says that the greatest painters “ all paint the lion more than his
mane, and the horse rather than his hide” ( 4:303). Again, imagination gets at the truth rather than
mere appearance of things, but beauty also has as much to do with the essence as with the mere
appearance of things.
To return to Modern Painters I, we can finally describe Ruskin’s category of “ relation.” He says
that he uses this term as “ one of convenience [rather] than as adequately expressive of the vast
class of ideas” that he intends “ to be comprehended under it, namely, all those conveyable by art,
which are the subjects of distinct intellectual perception and action, and which are therefore worthy
of the name of thoughts.” Under this head, he says, “ must be arranged everything productive
John
Ruskin on Painting and Sculpture
385
of expression, sentiment, and character, whether in figures or landscapes” ( Ruskin, 1903– 1912;
3:112). This category includes the historical associations of objects of art, what Ruskin discusses
in The Seven Lamps of Architecture under the rubric of “ The Lamp of Memory.” Putting “ relation”
together with Ruskin’s other categories, we can see that in his view our experience of painting
comprises the beauty of the outward appearance of nature ( including humankind), the intimation
of the inner essence and ultimately the divine ground of nature, and the whole range of human
“ expression, sentiment, and character,” as both part of nature and response to nature. In other
words, Ruskin’s painting can capture the whole range of human experience and thought of both
nature and ourselves, and is not to be limited to depicting one aspect of nature— such as pure
form— or depicting by one means, for example, as Kant notoriously asserted, by “ drawing” rather
than “ color” ( Kant 1790 [2000], §14, 5:225, following Alberti 1435– 1446 [2011]; Book II.31,
50–52).
We can turn now to Ruskin’s conception of truth as truthfulness, a quality of the artist rather
than of the artwork. What Ruskin means is that artwork cannot be true except as a product of the
artist’s desire for truth: “ no artist can be graceful, imaginative, or original, unless he is truthful;
and... the pursuit of beauty, instead of leading us away from the truth, increases the desire for it
and the necessity of it tenfold” ( Ruskin, 1903– 1912; 3:138). In Modern Painters III, Ruskin includes
a chapter on “ The Real Nature of the Greatness of Style,” and here his argument is that while
“ great” or “ high” art requires “ Choice of Noble Subject,” for example “ sacred subjects, such as
the Nativity, Transfiguration, Crucifixion,” even the right choice of subject can produce great art
only “ if the choice be sincere,” that is, the artist himself must believe in the importance and truth
of what she chooses to depict ( Ruskin, 1903– 1912; 5: 48– 49). “ Sincerity” as well as “ Invention”
are necessary elements of the imagination of the successful artist. Part of what this involves is
subordinating the display of one’s technical gifts to the overarching purpose of the work of art.
For example, although Rembrandt can dazzle us with his talent, for example, representing “ the
exact force with which the light on the most illumined part of an object is opposed to its obscurer
portions,” a greater artist, for instance, Paolo Veronese, uses his technical prowess
To represent the great relations of visible things to each other, to the heaven above, and to the
earth beneath them... restraining, for truth’s sake, exhaustless energy, reining back, for truth’s
sake, his fiery strength; veiling before truth, the vanity of brightness; penetrating, for truth,
the discouragement of gloom... subduing all his powers, impulses, and imagination, to the...
obedience of an incorruptible verity.
(5:59)
We might not agree with Ruskin’s preference for Veronese over Rembrandt, but what is clear is
his view that truthfulness is commitment to truth in art, as broadly construed as that concept of
truth may have to be, as more important than technical facility. But while truthfulness is a quality
of the artist’s character, Ruskin is not suggesting that we value it in our assessment of art for its
own sake, purely as a virtue of the artist, but as a causal condition of the production of great art. As
a causal claim, of course, Ruskin’s assertion should be empirically testable, and whether it would
pass the test of experience is a separate question.
Ruskin’s conception of truthfulness in painting may be compared to his treatment of the
“ Lamp of Truth” in The Seven Lamps of Architecture. There Ruskin inveighs against the deceptive
use of materials in architecture: for example, although there is no deception involved in plastering
brick walls in order to cover them with frescoes, “ to cover brick with cement, and to divide this
cement with joints that it may look like stone, is to tell a falsehood,” and is “ contemptible” for
this reason ( Ruskin, 1903– 1912; 8:73), and likewise to use “ cast- iron ornaments” to reproduce
the carved stone of genuine medieval buildings is “ vulgar and cheap,” for while “ The common
Paul
Guyer
386
ironwork of the middle ages was as simple as it was effective, composed of leafage cut flat out
of sheet iron, and twisted at the workman’s will,” no “ ornaments, on the contrary, are so cold,
clumsy, and vulgar, so essentially incapable of a fine line or shadow, as those of c ast- iron” ( 8: 85–
86). Here his objection is, first, to the incapacity of the ersatz material to genuinely produce the
aesthetic effect of the original, and thus Ruskin’s objection to “ falsehood” in the use of materials
in architecture would seem, like his insistence on truthfulness as a necessary condition of truth
in painting: to depend upon a causal claim: ersatz materials are rejected as causally incompatible
with the desired aesthetic effect in architecture. But Ruskin’s insistence upon architectural truth
also seems to reflect a moral judgment, namely that deception as such is a morally bad thing no
matter what its aesthetic effect might be. Ruskin says of “ surface deceits” in architecture, such as
“ the painting of wood to represent marble, or... the painting of ornaments in deceptive relief...
that the evil of them consists always in definitely attempted deception” ( 8:72), and here his assumption
seems to be that deception is a moral evil rather than an aesthetic ill and that as a moral evil
it is the intention and attempt to deceive, whether or not the deception succeeds, which is the
real evil. Ruskin does not provide a philosophical analysis of deception according to which deception
involves one person trying to get another to believe something that the first person does
not actually believe and which the second person would not believe either but for the first person
presenting his statement as if he did believe it. But Ruskin does understand the implication of
such an analysis, namely, that what counts as attempted deception depends upon the antecedent
beliefs of the audience, that is, on what the audience would believe in the absence of the would- b e
deceiver’s efforts. Thus, he argues that the painted fan vaulting of the Milan cathedral is a “ gross
degradation,” because it plays upon the natural tendency of the observer to assume that there are
stone ribs in the ceiling of such a cathedral ( 8:72), but that to fasten a “ veneering of marble” on
“ the rough brick wall” of a church, “ built with certain projections to receive it,” is not deception,
“ even though what appear to be massy stones, are nothing more than external slabs” ( 8 : 7 8– 9 ),
because it is “ well known” that this is how churches are built, readily observed, for example, in
the unfinished facade of a church such as San Petronio in Bologna.
Of course, that the possibility of deception by art ( or anything else) depends upon the beliefs
or mental attitudes of the audience means that such possibility is historically relative and changeable.
Ruskin recognizes this in a slightly different context when he admits that an aversion to the
structural use of iron and glass in architecture, as in the Crystal Palace of 1851, will change simply
as we become more accustomed to the use of such materials. In this case, his objection is not that
the use of these materials is deceptive, but simply that it is new and jarring; but of course, what is
new and jarring can come to seem old and familiar, and indeed Ruskin concedes “ that the time
is probably near when a new system of architectural laws will be developed, adapted entirely to
metallic construction” ( Ruskin, 1903– 1 912; 8:66). The more general implication, thus for the
case of painting as well, is that what can often seem to be Ruskin’s conservatism is not absolute;
while the acceptance of innovations in style may not be immediate, new styles can gradually be
accepted. Thus “ Greatness of Style” in painting or any other artistic medium cannot be identified
with any superficial features of style, just as truth in painting cannot be identified with the accurate
reproduction of the superficial appearance of objects but has much more to do with the depth
of thought and emotion expressed in art as a product of the artist’s truthfulness or desire for truth.
Now for a concluding comment on sculpture. As noted, Ruskin never devoted a whole book
to sculpture, but it does figure in the central chapter “ On the Nature of Gothic” in The Stones of
Venice. Ruskin famously defends Gothic architecture on the ground that unlike the monuments of
Greek architecture, which he supposes to have been built to rigid specifications by slaves, or contemporary
buildings with m achine- made or at least m achine- like ornament, Gothic architecture
allows for the free expression of the imagination of the workmen involved. What he has in mind
is above all the sculptural elements of Gothic cathedrals, including both sculptured figures but
John Ruskin on Painting and Sculpture
387
also the capitals of columns, which often vary from one to the next, and often include sculptured
human and animal faces as well as foliage. Ruskin praises the variety in such capitals under the
rubric of “ changefulness,” but his explanation makes it clear that what he values in the Gothic is
not just the experience of variety by the observer but also the freedom allowed to the workmen
who created these sculptures:
Wherever the workman is utterly enslaved, the parts of the building must of course be absolutely
like each other; for the perfection of his execution can only be reached by exercising
him in doing one thing, and giving him nothing else to do. The degree in which the workman
is degraded may thus be known at a glance, by observing whether the several parts of
the building are similar or not; and if, as in Greek work, all the capitals are alike, and all the
mouldings unvaried, the degradation is complete;... if, as in Gothic work, there is perpetual
change both in design and execution, the workman must have been altogether set free.
(Ruskin, 1903–1912; 10:204–205)
We would have to know about the labor conditions at buildings that often took centuries to complete
in order to know how true Ruskin’s claim really is, but in line with his general approach,
he could argue that we experience the variety in Gothic edifices as the expression of the freedom
of workmen, and take pleasure in that because we take pleasure in freedom itself. This would become
a central theme in Ruskin’s criticism of the social effects of capitalist industry beginning in
the 1860s. We might also argue that Ruskin’s valuation of expressions of freedom must underlie
his approach to painting as well as sculpture, and that he must have valued the work of Turner
because of the unusual degree of freedom from ordinary conventions of depiction evident in the
work of that painter as well as for the other reasons that he gives. In that case, the pleasure that
we take in what we experience as the expression of the freedom of imagination on the part of
painters as well as sculptures would be the common thread in Ruskin’s approach to both painting
and sculpture.
Works Cited
Alberti, Leon Battista (1435–1436 [2011]). On Painting: A New Translation and Critical Edition. Edited and
translated by Rocco Sinisgalli. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Batteux, Charles ( 1746 [2015]). The Fine Arts Reduced to a Single Principle. Translated by James O. Young.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Guyer, Paul ( 2014). A History of Modern Aesthetics. 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hewison, Robert ( 2009). Ruskin on Venice. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Hume, David (1739–40 [2007]). A Treatise of Human Nature. Edited by Date Fate Norton and Mary J. Norton.
2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hutcheson, Francis ( 1725 [2008]). An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue. Edited by
Wolfgang Leidhold. Revised edition. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.
Kant, Immanuel ( 1790 [2000]). The Critique of the Power of Judgment. Edited by Paul Guyer, translated by Paul
Guyer and Eric Matthews. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ruskin, John (1903–12). The Library Edition of the Works of John Ruskin. Edited by E.T. Cook and Alexander
Wedderburn. 39 vols. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Further Reading
Two useful selection from the works of Ruskin are:
Ruskin, John ( 1995). Selected Writings. Edited by Philip Davis. London: J.M. Dent, and Vermont: Charles
E. Tuttle.
Ruskin, John ( 2004). Selected Writings. Edited by Dinah Birch. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
The standard biography of Ruskin is:
Paul
Guyer
388
Hilton, Tim ( 1985). John Ruskin: The Early Years. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Hilton, Tim ( 2000). John Ruskin: The Later Years. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Several valuable studies include:
Ballantyne, Andrew ( 2015). John Ruskin. London: Reaktion Books.
Helsinger, Elizabeth ( 1982). Ruskin and the Art of the Beholder. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hewison, Robert ( 1976). John Ruskin: The Argument of the Eye. London: Thames and Hudson.
Landow, George P. ( 1971). The Aesthetic and Critical Theories of John Ruskin. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Landow, George P. ( 1985). Ruskin. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Proust, Marcel ( 1987). On Reading Ruskin. Translated and edited by Jean Autret, William Burford, and Phillip
J. Wolfe. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Rosenberg, John ( 1961). The Darkening Glass: A Portrait of Ruskin’s Genius. New York: Columbia University
Press.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-45 389
37NELSON GOODMAN’S THEORY OF EXPRESSION AND EXEMPLIFICATION
Problems and Halting Solutions
John Bender
Two of the traditional pillars of aesthetics are Representation and Expression, and what I mean by this is that these are among the fundamental ways in which art, and especially visual art like painting, is conceived as relating to human concerns and to the world at large. Moreover, questions like “ What is it for an artwork such as a painting to depict Mont S ainte- Victoire, to represent evening light, to be sad or humorous, balanced or unrestrained?” seem to be of inexhaustible interest to philosophers of art.
It is well- known that Nelson Goodman, in his book Languages of Art ( LA; 1968) and in later writings, developed a theory that views art symbolically: making art is s ymbol- m aking for Good-man. And central to this view is a theory of representation and expression as symbolic relations: in Goodman’s hands, these turn out to be various relations of reference. Linguistic denotation, the clearest example of reference, is reference by a symbol to an object by naming or being a definite description of the object. So, “N apoleon” denotes the French general and emperor, Bonaparte.
There is a type of complex reference, that Goodman calls “ exemplification,” which is at the heart of his theory of both how paintings express emotions or various other properties, as well as how paintings represent objects in certain ways— w hat Goodman calls, “ representation as.” In this chapter, I shall present two rather deep problems for Goodman’s theory of exemplification and expression. These problems will be diagnosed and tentative solutions will be proffered. Unfortu-nately, the solutions themselves run into shortcomings and difficulties. I will make these defects clear, but at present, I have no better prospects for success to suggest. This leaves us without a unified theory of expression, but it is my hope that we will have gained a clearer appreciation of the complexities of the concept of artistic expression.
1 A Dilemma for Exemplification: The First Problem
Although representation will not be the focus of this chapter, I begin my discussion of exemplifi-cation with a brief treatment of Goodman’s theory of representation, in order to distinguish rep-resentation from expression, and in order to fully understand the pivotal role that exemplification plays for Goodman. Any problem affecting the concept of exemplification will leave unresolved questions not only about expression but also about representation.
A portrait of Napoleon denotes Napoleon, Goodman says. But pictorial representation involves more. Objects must be represented as something: Napoleon is represented as a soldier or general. So the portrait not only denotes Napoleon but is a certain kind of picture, a “ s o- a nd- s o picture,” Goodman says; in this case, an “army-general-picture.” John
Bender
390
In general, then, an object k is represented as a s o- a nd- s o by a picture p if and only if p is or
contains a picture that as a whole both denotes k and is a s o- and- so picture.
( LA, 28f)
Representation-as, or being a so-and-so picture, obviously requires the picture to have certain
properties. A canvas painted homogeneously red is not an army- general picture because it does
not have the right properties.
Of course, many properties possessed by a painting are not relevant or important to the painting’s
symbolic function, e.g., “ being 347 sq. in. in area,” or “ being painted with acrylic paints.” A
painting not only has certain of its properties but, in addition, exhibits, shows off, highlights, or
“ refers to” them, according to Goodman. Properties which are both possessed by and highlighted
or referred to by the painting are exemplified by the picture, for Goodman.
Which properties a piece exemplifies depends on how the painting is being used as a symbol,
or in what sort of symbol system it is functioning. Goodman asks us to think of a tailor’s swatch.
Exemplification [of a property by an artwork] is possession plus reference”... “ The [tailor’s]
swatch exemplifies only those properties that it both has and refers to.” ( LA, 53). “ An object
that is literally or metaphorically denoted by a predicate, and refers to that predicate or the
corresponding property, may be said to exemplify that predicate or property.
(LA, 52)
Color, texture, pattern, and weight of material are exemplified by the swatch, but not its size or
pinked edges, because of the way the swatch is normally u sed— because of what it is taken to be a
sample of. Similarly, paintings exemplify some but not all of their properties.
We see, then, that what kind of picture a painting is, as well as which properties a painting is
thought to highlight or call to the viewer’s attention, is understood as a matter of exemplification
on this theory.
Therefore, when we call something a pictorial representation of Napoleon-as-a-general, there
are two distinct relations involved according to Goodman: denotation of an object, and exemplification
of certain properties.
Exemplification is, therefore, not itself denotation. Why? When a painting denotes, it relates
itself to an object. Exemplification is possession of, and highlighting of, or reference back to, a
property by the painting. Why not say that pictures can denote properties as well as objects? Here,
Goodman’s nominalism prohibits him from countenancing properties, being altogether more
comfortable using a different “ p- word:” “ predicates.” Goodman prefers to talk of predicates because
predicates are themselves symbols or labels, i.e., elements in our language.
An object is gray, or is an instance of or possesses grayness, if and only if “ gray” applies to the
object.” “…what properties the picture … possesses depends upon what predicates denote it.
(LA, 51)
Exemplification of a property by a painting is, then, denotation of the painting by a predicate and
reference back to the predicate. Now it is clear why representation or denotation of an object is
not to be confused with exemplification in Goodman’s theory, even though they are both matters
of denotation. In one case, the artwork denotes an object; in the other, a predicate denotes an
artwork. It is a “ difference of direction,” as Goodman puts it. ( LA, 50).
Exemplification does a lot of theoretical work for Goodman. Not only is a Napoleon portrait
an “ a rmy- general- picture” because of the properties it exemplifies, but also a painting exemplifies
many of its pictorial properties such as “ being predominantly green,” “ having spiraling shapes,”
Nelson
Goodman’s Theory of Expression and Exemplification
391
“ being iridescently bright in color,” and also exemplifies its s o- called “ aesthetic” properties: a
work can exemplify power, balance, delicacy, motion, anxiety, or sadness.
Some of these properties, like being predominantly green, are literally true of the painting.
Others are metaphors, e.g., “ sad,” “ delicate.” When an exemplified property is metaphorically possessed,
the property is expressed by the artwork.
“ Not all exemplification is expression, but all expression is exemplification.” ( LA, 52). “ What
is expressed is metaphorically exemplified. What expresses sadness is metaphorically sad. And
what is metaphorically sad is actually but not literally sad.” … “ Thus what is expressed is
possessed.” ( LA, 85). “ A symbol must have every property it expresses.”
(LA, 88)
We now have the complete view, which analyzes both “ representation as” and expression in
semantic terms—predominantly exemplification—but which nonetheless categorically distinguishes
the one from the other.
This theory is complex enough to be challenged in numerous ways, e.g., one might even have reservations
about the basic contention that art is symbolic. But I want to ease us into a problem “ internal”
to the theory. I start with some examples which make Goodman’s view appear to be correct, but then
offer some t rouble- makers. Ultimately, I will argue that Goodman’s theory faces a logical dilemma,
and either way, it moves to try to extricate itself will imply that the theory is, in part, incorrect.
In many cases, the properties we wish to say are exemplified or expressed are, as Goodman requires,
truly possessed by the work; the predicate is correctly applicable to the painting itself. Otto
Dix’s Card Playing War Cripples is grotesque, for example. Not only are the card players depicted
as grotesque, the work itself exemplifies grotesqueness. In Monet’s Rouen Cathedral not only does
the cathedral appear to be dissolving in the light, but this predicate also seems true of the painting.
Leger’s Three Women exemplifies “ looks machine- made,” “ stamped out,” and not accidentally, the
women depicted also may be said to look machine- made.
But these examples should make us suspicious. There is a subtle difference between Leger’s
painting looking machine- made, and the depicted women looking m achine- made.
Let us call properties that a painting literally or metaphorically ascribes to something depicted
in the work, depictional predicates. Call properties true of the work because of the painting’s compositional,
painterly, or stylistic characteristics, compositional predicates, for want of a better word.
It appears that, in many cases, paintings possess compositional properties as a partial result of the
way they depict things in the paintings: the Monet looks to be dissolving because of the way the
cathedral is pictured. There is a kind of transfer of properties up to the painting.
But this is not always the case. What does Leger’s The Cardplayers express? We want to say,
“ how modern mechanized warfare not only mutilates soldiers but turns them partially into machines:
the machine-like nature of soldiers is expressed.” But is the painting actually m achine- like;
does it possess the property, “ being m achine- l ike?” No. Compare the earlier Leger, where we do
want to say this.
An even clearer example is Max Ernst’s The Elephant Celebes. The depicted corn bin is elephantine,
and it seems correct to say that the work expresses or exemplifies that property, but it
is surely incorrect to describe the work as elephantine. That predicate is not actually ( not even in
a metaphorical way) possessed by the painting. Velasquez’s famous portrait of Pope Innocent X
expresses weakness, corruption, and even lasciviousness, but the painting is anything but weak or
corrupt, let alone “ lascivious.”
Goodman himself uses “ express” and “ exemplify” in this broad way: he would not object, I
think, to the claim that the Velasquez expressed corruption. In Ways of Worldmaking ( WW, 1978),
e.g., Goodman compares two works, a drawing and a print and says:
John
Bender
392
Although the Sturgis drawing (HockeyPlayers) and the Pollaiuolo engraving ( Battle of Ten Naked Warriors) both represent men in physical conflict, the Sturgis expresses flashing action while the Pollaiuolo expresses poised power … and Joyce’s Ulysses expresses an infinite cy-cling of time.
(WW,28f.)
In general, a symbol of a given kind— pic torial, musical, verbal, etc.— e xpresses only proper-ties that it metaphorically exemplifies as a symbol of that kind.
(LA,87)
Is the Pollaiuolo actually poisedly powerful? No. In the art historical scheme of things, it is rela-tively static— a s if a single moment of a powerful event has been captured. Compare Rembrandt’s Blinding of Sampson which is, I think, poisedly powerful.
Once the distinction between depictional and compositional predicates is seen, it becomes clear, I believe, that paintings can express or exemplify properties that they do not actually possess. Paint-ings sometimes exemplify or express properties by depicting objects as possessing them.
There is an element of Goodman’s theory that might be used to attempt to address this prob-lem. For every problem- causing predicate, one can develop a related one which is true of the painting. For example, Velasquez’s painting is not itself lascivious, but it is a lascivious- p ope- painting. The Pollaiuolo might not be poisedly powerful, but it is a poised- power- picture. These predicates might seem odd, but they are true of the works, and they are used by Goodman as a way of marking off how we classify pictures.
When confronted with examples of expressed properties that are not actually possessed by a work, can the theory resolve the problem by claiming that, e.g., the Pollaiuolo does exemplify “ being a poised power etching?” The work does possess this property, but the other necessary condition for exemplification is that it highlights or refers back to this “ Goodman predicate.” But does the theory support such a highlighting or reference back to such constructed predicates?
Highlighting or referring back is the rather vague idea introduced by the example of the tai-lor’s swatch. If a certain seascape is said to exemplify “ being an unfathomable- unforgiving- sea- picture,” then, a tailor’s swatch must be said to exemplify “ being a ( standard- size, s tandard- cut) tailor’s swatch.” Remember, though, that Goodman says that the swatch exemplifies only proper-ties like weight, pattern, texture of cloth, and not its size and pinked edges. In fact, he explicitly denies that the swatch typically exemplifies “ being a tailor’s swatch.”
The tailor’s sample does not normally function as a sample of a tailor’s sample; it normally ex-emplifies certain properties of a material but not the property of exemplifying such properties.
(LA,54)
Another argument that Goodman predicates like “ being a p oised- power- picture” are not high-lighted by an artwork is this: if they were highlighted or referred back to by the work, it would be what Goodman calls a s elf- referential symbol, yet he says that artworks which are s elf- r eferential are “ in the minority” ( LA, 64).
So, even if a G oodman- predicate is possessed by an artwork, it is wholly unclear that it is ex-emplified by the work in the typical case.
Goodman is in a dilemma: either he must admit that some cases of exemplification and expres-sion do not involve possession of the property ( in other words, do not involve denotation of the work by a predicate) in which case his theory is in error or he must rely on G oodman- p redicates which do denote the work, but which are not “ referred back” to by the picture, in which case
Nelson
Goodman’s Theory of Expression and Exemplification
393
his theory is in error. The error is in defining exemplification and expression as possession plus
highlighting, ( or alternately, denotation plus reference back to the predicate). Since both horns of
the dilemma lead to the result that Goodman’s theory is in part incorrect, we must conclude that
the theory of exemplification is left twisting on the dilemma’s horns.
I should say that I think Goodman just caught a glimmer of this problem. Late in Languages of
Art ( 92), he says, “ Not every sad- person- picture is itself sad,” which is, of course, part of my basic
point. The rest of my point is that such a picture may nonetheless express sadness. However, only
two sentences later, he returns to his original position. He says: “E xemplification relates a symbol
( a picture) to a label ( predicate) which denotes it.” And we have seen that this is equivalent, in
property talk, to saying that exemplification relates a picture to a property it possesses.
It seems to me that the phenomenon I have referred to as “ ascent” is an interesting one that any
theory of expression should recognize. We might state it as follows:
Property Ascent: sometimes painting A is expressive of property P as a ( partial) result of
A’s depicting something x as being expressive of P.
However, this brings along with it the consequence of acknowledging that there can be instances
of property expression that do not require literal or metaphorical property possession by A.
What I cannot provide at this time is a theory of either when or why property ascent occurs.
Hence, at present, we seem only to be capturing our rather weak intuitions of when it is correct
to say that A is expressive of P as a result of ascent. But we can see, I think, that expressiveness in
art is a more complicated phenomenon than Goodman’s theory acknowledges.
2 Goodman’s Theory Seems “ Backwards” for Certain Cases: The Second Problem
Exemplification, whatever its problems, shows that painting and the related visual arts are involved
in a variety of types of reference. A singularly important form of exemplification is expression.
It is particularly interesting ( especially to an abstract painter like myself ) that abstract
paintings frequently establish reference to things expressive, most obviously, to human emotions,
moods, and feelings. This is what gives us Abstract Expressionism. I will be offering a view of abstract
expressionism that is, in a sense, diametrically opposed to Goodman’s theory of expression.
Nevertheless, my position has p ro- Goodman, as well as c ontra- Goodman aspects. Like Goodman,
I think that expressiveness is more a matter of reference, metaphor, inference, and cognition,
than it is, e.g., some kind of emotional reflex response to a visual stimulus.
When a painting strikes us as expressive of some emotion, it has succeeded in referring—
perhaps vaguely, perhaps ambiguously, but still s uccessfully— to something in our emotional topology.
But how this works, in at least some cases, does not seem to conform to Goodman’s theory
of expression.
As already mentioned, expression, for Goodman, is metaphorical exemplification, which
means that the expressive painting is in the metaphorical extension of a certain predicate, e.g., “ is
sad” or “ is lively”— “ sad” or “ lively” being metaphorically true of the painting; plus there is a reference
back to those predicates by the painting, since it highlights its sad or lively character. I wish
to suggest that the painting’s literal ( or nearly literal) pictorial properties set up a metaphorical
association to an emotional state, making the painting expressive of that state because its pictorial
properties are metaphorically true of that emotional state. There is no reference by the painting back to
predicates— G oodman is surely wrong about t his— b ut more importantly, at least in some cases, it
seems that expressiveness is not a matter of the painting being in the metaphorical denotation of
a predicate that names an expressive property; rather, it is that the painting exemplifies visual relations
which we accept as metaphorically true of our emotional experiences. The metaphor runs
from the painting to the emotion, not from the emotion’s name to the painting.
John Bender
394
Let me refer to two of my paintings that I believe may help to make this point. The first work is entitled Broken Order. I intended this piece to be, and hope it is, expressive. There is a palpable sense of mood in the work. Once you read the word “ disturbance” in the lower portion of Broken Order, you sense that the starkness of the painting indicates its emotional reference will be to a “ dark” emotion, not to joy or innocent frivolity. Notice already that we have used a description, “ dark,” that is literally true of the painting and only metaphorically true of certain emotions. Goodman’s theory goes in the other direction: “ sad,” e.g., is literally true of an emotion and met-aphorically true of the sad painting.
We say that pangs of despair, or regret, or panic, unease, or dread can cut razor- like into one’s calm, can alter the texture of one’s experience, can come in like a wave and blanket your current state, and so forth. Although I would not try to defend the idea that all of these descriptions are lit-erally true of a painting, I do think that they are more immediately and pictorially true of a painting than they are of an emotion. The relevant emotions are metaphorically described in these ways, and therefore, paintings exemplifying such properties can be seen as referring to those emotions.
Hence, my claim is that a painting P is abstractly expressive of Φ when P literally exemplifies properties and relations that can be thought of as metaphorically applying to the emotion Φ, because of some similarity that obtains between the properties P exemplifies and the properties that are characteristic of emotion Φ, or being in Φ, or being a Φ person. The painting, then, is a metaphor for the emotion. This is how reference gets established. The painting is said to be metaphorically Φ when it literally possesses properties that metaphorically apply to the emotion. The painting is not metaphorically “ sad” as much as sadness is metaphorically drab, gray, and static. So, we have Goodman, but from 180°.
An additional and final example makes no new point, but reinforces the claim that expression is a form of exemplification; that expression is artistic reference to abstract properties and relations, pictorially represented, that can be thought of as similar to the properties of emotion, or meta-phorically true of given emotions.
Another painting of mine, entitled Emotional Embers, exemplifies a dormant glow that might be a cooling down or an imminent sparking up. It has a brighter outside frame that makes the middle areas seem further back in the painting’s depth, as if presenting the residue of some event that once covered or encompassed the middle area. This reinforces the idea that what is expressed is the effect of some past incendiary event. Something transpired here and something is still going on. I would say that incendiary processes and properties are represented or alluded to rather literally here— a t least more literally than these properties are true of emotional events we have all experi-enced. Yet we metaphorically describe such events in incendiary terms, and hence, can make the association between the exemplified properties of the painting and those emotional events. As a consequence, it strikes us as true that the painting expresses or refers to such emotions. Again, the painting has pictorial properties that are metaphorically true of the emotion. Metaphor runs from the symbol, the painting, to the natural object, the emotion, and the association is secured. This involves definite reference by the painting to certain properties that are metaphorically true of the emotion rather than to predicates metaphorically denoting the painting.
It should be noted that the explanation given for the expressive quality of the artwork will not also be the explanation for the metaphorical attribution of that property to the emotion. This latter attribution is a metaphor already established, not by any connection to art, but by the natural associations widely experienced in daily life. For example, an artwork may be expressive of a burning desire of one sort or another but, obviously, the desire itself is not metaphorically “ burning” because of its relationship to an artwork. Rather, a burning desire is one that we want to “ put out,” i.e., satisfy, and is also one that “ hurts” prior to its satisfaction. An association is made between a physical state ( being burnt by fire) and a mental state ( the desire) which is in no way dependent on the relation the desire has to an artwork expressing that emotion.
Nelson Goodman’s Theory of Expression and Exemplification
395
The fact that Goodman’s view can be applied to n on- a rtistic cases of metaphor, at least to the
extent that we acknowledge that a burning desire is in the metaphorical denotation of “ burning,”
does nothing to support his position on aesthetic expression over against the one offered here. Our
argument is that an artwork expressing burning desire is, at least in some cases, quite a different
thing from a natural desire being understandably described as “ burning.”
At least one source of Goodman’s difficulties is that he conflates the two predicates, “ __ is
a metaphor for ___” and “ __is in the metaphorical denotation of ___.” But these predicates
are not synonymous. Is every cheerful painting a metaphor for cheerfulness? No. Is a seemingly
dripping painting ( Monet) a metaphor for “ drippiness”? Hardly. The Sturgis painting is in the
metaphorical denotation of “ flashing action” but is not a metaphor for flashing action. It represents
hockey players as involved in flashing action but to be a metaphor for flashing action it must make
some referential connection to flashing action in general, much as the whale in Moby Dick is a
metaphor for evils which must be fought. Paintings can have expressive properties without being
metaphors for those properties. They may simply not be involved in the metaphor function.
Hence, not everything important about metaphor is going to be captured by Goodman’s concentration
on metaphorical denotation.
3 But Our Suggestion Cannot Be a Wholesale Replacement for Goodman’s Theory
How philosophically easy it would be to simply substitute the new theory of expression for Goodman’s.
No such substitution will work, however. One example that has already been discussed
will be sufficient to uncover the problem. Return, then, to Velasquez’s Pope Innocent X. The
painting expresses lasciviousness, I have suggested, and have argued that Goodman would agree.
According to the expressive theory put forward above, there must be features literally true of the
painting that can be metaphorically predicated to the Pope himself in virtue of his lasciviousness.
But what might such features be? The painting expresses lasciviousness ( this is an instance of
“ ascent”) presumably as a result of the Pope being depicted with a leer that is such that we identify
it as evil in a number of ways, lasciviousness being among them. But “ being depicted with such a
leer” is not a feature metaphorically true of the Pope, and, indeed, since the Pope is the original
owner of the leer, we do not seem to be in the area of metaphor at all. Unlike the abstract Broken
Order there seems to be no pictorial properties in the portrait which we could say are literally true
of the painting but metaphorically true of poor Pope Innocent. Our suggested theory of expression
fails in this case.
One might attempt to solve this problem by denying that depictional properties that are true of
the work as a whole by way of ascent are not expressive but rather representational properties true
of the work in virtue of the work’s representing some object as possessing that property. But if
this is seen as a pro- Goodmanian move, it pays a substantial price. It would significantly contract
the range of expressive properties that Goodman’s theory could countenance. Properties such as
“ flashing action” and “ poised power” would no longer be subsumed under Goodman’s theory.
Perhaps another unified solution will be forthcoming, but I, for one, do not see it at present. The
conclusion does not, however, have to be negative. It may be that we have gotten onto a couple of
ways in which artistic expression is a more complex feature of art than we may had earlier supposed.
It is in no way absurd to conjecture that artistic expression can be accomplished in more than one
way and that art is that much richer for it. This, at any rate, seems to be where the matters stand.
4 Conclusion
I have offered two major challenges to Goodman’s theory of the semantic functions of art. I have
argued that property exemplification by an artwork does not require the actual possession of the
John Bender
396
property by the work. Depictional properties can be exemplified, even though not actually true of the work. Consequently, exemplification and expression do not entail property possession.
I have also claimed that an artwork’s being expressive of a certain property is, at least in some cases, not a matter of that work’s being metaphorically denoted by a predicate naming the prop-erty expressed.
If these conclusions initially seem to be only fussy analytic details, they are not, for they ulti-mately show that fundamental tenets of Goodman’s theory must be rethought. The r e- thinking led us to the idea of property ascent as well as to a new analysis of artistic expression that seemed to work well for abstract expressionist painting in particular. Limitations were encountered, though. We lack anything like a theory of property ascent, and the new suggestions about expression were not without counterexample. But a more complete understanding of artistic expression can none-theless be gleaned from these halting solutions. And, irrefutably, Nelson Goodman is the original inspiration.
References
Goodman, Nelson. 1968. Languages of Art. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Co.———. 1978. Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-46 397
38E. H. GOMBRICH
William P. Seeley
What Constable ‘ really’ saw in Wivenhoe park was surely a house across a lake. What he had learned to paint was a flat patch that allowed any number of readings, including the correct one.
E. H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion,p. 278
Sir Ernst Hans Josef Gombrich was an art historian with a keen interest in both cultural history and perceptual psychology. Gombrich was born in Austria in 1909. He emigrated to the United Kingdom in 1936 and became a naturalized British citizen in 1947. All but one of his books, Eine Kurze Weltgeschichte Für Junge Leser ( 1936), were published in English. The Story of Art ( 1950) is perhaps his most widely read book. It outlines a broadly accessible history of Western visual art ( albeit from a uniquely mid- 20th- century perspective). His influence in philosophy is, however, most closely tied to his writing and lectures on art and the psychology of perception. These ma-terials are collected in Art and Illusion(1960),Meditations on a Hobby Horse ( 1963), and The Image and the Eye(1981).
Gombrich argued that artworks are communicative devices. Understanding an artwork re-quires some form of cooperative collaboration between an artist and a consumer. Artworks are structured to carry hints or suggestions for how they are to be recognized, perceived, and under-stood. Some of these hints are biologically salient cues that suffice to trigger automatic perceptual processes. Others are stylistically unique cues that indicate how an artwork should be used as a communicative proxy, how consumers should recognize and understand its content.
Gombrich’s interests in this context were focused on paintings, pictures, and other kinds of two- d imensional representational media. He argued that artists and consumers come to learn the conventional structure of artistic communication via their active engagement with these types of artifacts. The general class of artworks can, in turn, be subdivided by media, genre, epoch, school, movement, artist, and other stylistic categories. Consumers ( and artists) learn to see art through the lens of these different stylistic categories. They learn to see a sub- class of representational ar-tifacts as artworks, paintings, sculptures, and other types of semantically inflected depictions that can be differentiated by era, school, movement, and individual style. The conventions that con-strain and define depictive practices within these different categories of art, in turn, shape the way consumers perceive the world that artworks have been constructed to represent. Consumers learn to recognize the world as an artwork. Said another way, the normative conventions governing productive practices in the representational arts reflect what is salient to the identity of a landscape, object, or event for a community at a time.
William
P. Seeley
398
There are constructivist undertones to Gombrich’s writings on representational art ( Winner,
1982, p. 90). Cognition is an adaptation that enables us to organize the perceptual world around
those everyday activities that constitute our environment. In engaging in those activities we learn
to recognize, and selectively direct attention to, just what is salient in the world for those behaviors
( Gombrich, 1951, 1960). Artists exploit these cognitive aspects of perception. They produce
what Gombrich identified as minimum images that function as perceptible substitutes for what they
represent. In the case of naturalistic painting, for instance, artists produce inflected formal patterns
that suffice to enable viewers to perceptually recognize what a work represents and what it meant
to represent that subject that particular way. Gombrich did not think that artworks resemble what
they represent ( Gombrich, 1951). What matters in matters of depiction is rather what we do with
them, how we use them. Representational artworks are artifacts that function as semantically
inflected, perceptual substitutes, or schematically stylized s tand- ins for the subject they represent in
a specialized communicative game of sorts.
The constructivist undertones of Gombrich’s theory have been associated with an illusion
theory of depiction. We readily recognize that pictures are composed of abstract t wo- d imensional
patterns of marks within a medium, e.g. charcoal on paper or pigment suspended in linseed oil
spread on canvas. Yet somehow we perceive the sum total of these marks to resemble, and so depict,
some subject. A loose notion of resemblance is critical to our folk concept of depiction. It is
often thought to be one of the key factors that distinguish pictures from verbal descriptions. Gombrich’s
suggestion was that formal patterns embodied in the design of an image encode perceptual
cues sufficient to enable ordinary perceivers, at least within the context of current conventions for
depiction, to recognize what the artist intended to depict. A depiction does not, strictly speaking,
resemble its subject. Rather these cues suffice to enable a consumer to perceptually recognize what
is depicted in the picture plane, and so induce an illusion of seeing that subject. Gombrich, therefore,
provided a psychological mechanism to explain how resemblance might work in pictorial representation,
e.g. how viewers recognize a naturalistic landscape in depth in what they easily see to
be an abstract t wo- dimensional pattern of paint.
The trick in Gombrich’s constructivist story about representational art is the observation that
we perceive what we recognize, not what we see per se. The constructivist account holds that we
perceive the world in terms of those learned concepts that encode the defining features of conventionally
and biologically salient categories. Perceptual recognition involves a matching process.
We match what we see to concepts that encode what we know about the world. What this entails
is that, when we recognize what we see, we see it as a particular instance of a member of a category,
a scene, object, or event replete with a projected range of expected attributes and behaviors.
A stick can represent a horse because it can substitute for one in a game of m ake- believe – i ts physical
attributes are fit to some minimal criteria of rideability. Artists working in naturalistic styles
analogously learn to construct minimal images or images that encode some range of diagnostic
perceptual cues sufficient to enable us to visually recognize their depictive subject.
Gombrich’s theory provides a nice explanation of the perceived resemblance between a canvas
or model and what it was designed to depict. It also explains why the development of systems for
realistic depiction should have been so hard. A constructivist account of perception suggests that
the translation from what we perceptually recognize to what we actually see is difficult. If we only
perceive what we recognize, and we only recognize what we can match to concepts that encode
the structure and function of familiar categories of things, then we need to be able to recognize
a scene object, event, or action as a painting, etching, drawing or other types of picture in order
to see what is necessary to manually depict it in a medium. The complexity of this task is compounded
by the fact that any of an uncountably large range of combinations of perceptual cues
might suffice in a given context to enable a perceiver to recognize what has been depicted. Artists
working in naturalistic styles don’t copy what they perceive per se. They must choose both how
E. H. Gombrich
399
to render the diagnostic cues sufficient to recognize their subjects and how much ( or how little) to
include in their compositions.
The net result, Gombrich argued, is that representational art has a recognizable history that
tracks relationships among different depictive systems or styles that have been developed over
time. Representational art is defined by a history of the languages of depiction that have been
deployed over time. Languages of art are, in this context, defined by conventional schema for
depicting types of things. These schema initially emerge as loosely described attentional strategies,
perceptual devices designed to direct attention to those aspects of the visual environment
that suffice to enable ordinary perceivers to recognize quotidian scenes, objects, and events in
the d ay- t o- d ayness of their everyday activities. Representational artworks encode subsets of the
same range of perceptual cues. They thereby suffice to induce an illusion of seeing in sufficiently
educated viewers.
It is important to note that there is some slip between this illusionistic account of depiction,
what Gombrich meant by the illusion of seeing, and the nature of everyday perceptual illusions.
Gombrich thought that the compositional structures of representational artifacts were constrained
by, and so carried information about, the everyday activities of ordinary consumers. These sorts
of activities reflect the goals, values, and associated normative attitudes of members of particular
communities at particular times. Gombrich identified related differences among the f ormalcompositional
strategies and semantic contents of different styles of art as critical to the practice of
depiction. When we recognize a landscape in a painting we recognize it as a landscape depicted in
a style with a particular communicative intent unique to a culture at a time, e.g. similarities and
differences between 1 8th- century Dutch and 19th- century Hudson River School canvases. Ordinary
consumers easily recognize these differences among works of familiar styles. They recognize
a particular work of art, say an 1 8th- c entury Dutch landscape, as a rendering of some subject in
a particular artistic style that carries information about the history of painting and the cultures
that support an associated range of artistic practices. Therefore, although consumers perceptually
recognize landscapes replete with a projected range of expected attributes and behaviors in these
images, they do not believe that they see those landscapes there. They believe, rather, that they see
representations, or intentionally inflected renderings, of those landscapes.
Everyday perceptual illusions are cognitive illusions. They are illusions that fool us. We often
believe, however briefly, that the world is as we mistakenly see it.1 The fact that viewers aren’t
fooled by what they see is often raised as an objection against Gombrich’s illusion theory of depiction.
However, a close reading of his theory shows that this objection won’t quite do. Gombrich
quite clearly thought that consumers recognize that art has a history. This fact is part and parcel of
( a metaphysician might say constitutive of ) their understanding of the communicative dimension
of depictive practices. Consumers both recognize and understand what it means for a landscape to
have been rendered in a particular style at a particular time. What this means is that they recognize
that art is an illusion. They aren’t fooled by it. They recognize that what they are looking at is a
highly stylized, conventionally constructed representation of a landscape. An understanding of the
historically constrained conventional nature of the activity of artistic representation, in turn, directs
attention and articulates their understanding of how the depicted subject has been rendered.
The trick is that all of this is a constitutive part of Gombrich’s theory of depiction. This raises
a question. What does it mean to say that Gombrich’s theory of depiction is an illusion theory?
1 The Gombrich- Gibson Debate
Once upon a time it was philosophically sound to imagine that the input to perception was
a topologically defined sensuous manifold, a systematically organized veridical map of colored
patches projected from the environment onto the picture plane of a visual field ( Kant, 1790). Light
William
P. Seeley
400
reflected onto the retina was collected, passed on, and represented as a global concatenation of visual sense data defined by what mid- 20th- century art critics might have called a Greenbergian sense of all- o verness! Perceptual recognition, borrowing from Kant, was thought to involve the intuition of some set of organizing principles embedded within the currently encoded sensuous manifold – o rganizing principles that provided compositional ( representational) structure to an otherwise undifferentiated t wo- dimensional mosaic of color. Vision, in other words, operated a lot like oil painting. An oil painting ( or any other two- d imensional pictorial representation for that matter) could be conceptualized as a retinal prosthesis, a substitute retinal image designed to artificially trigger the process of visual recognition in the gallery ( or more generally on the wall). The process of painting, constructing a picture, could, further, be reconstructed as a problem of optics, a puzzle about the geometric projection of wholistic mosaics of light projected onto a two- dimensional plane ( perhaps naively resolvable by something like Alberti’s Window). Oil painting could, therefore, be used to model vision itself.
Vision does of course begin with a procedure that is something like this. Pictures can, as a re-sult, be conceptualized as retinal prostheses of a sort. Many years ago, when I was a young artist, I learned from a friend’s dad that when lithographers were enjoined to reproduce editions of a target image they would project a grid onto a copy of the original and painstakingly copy the color gradients, or texture information, contained within each cell. At least that is what they did in a more analog time. The strategy is remarkably successful for producing of reproductions. Gom-brich points out, however, that it is an impossible strategy for painting and other manual forms of picture making. What’s the trouble? No one has ever seen a raw retinal image. Nor could they. We see and perceive what we recognize, not what we see.
Consider the figure reproduced on page 237 of Art and Illusion. It is an image of three identical figures projected onto the wireframe grid of an imaginary hallway. The aperture of the depicted hallway narrows with its perspectival projection into space. The apparent sizes of the three figures increase in inverse proportion to the apparent narrowing of the hallway. The furthest of the three figures appears to tower over its cousin in the foreground. They are however identical figures. They are the same size. They take up the same amount of space in the picture plane. Their retinal projections are therefore identically sized. But we don’t perceive them that way. Why not? The relationship of each figure to the metric of their local space is different. The perspectival projec-tion of the drawing compresses the metric of the local hall space as it fades into the distance. The furthest figure therefore appears to take up more space. Psychological mechanisms associated with the perception of size constancy cause it to appear bigger to us than its pictorially closer cousins. Similar mechanisms contribute to brightness and color constancy in perception. What we perceive is what we would expect to see in the natural scene that we recognize depicted in the picture given the compositional relationships rendered on the canvas. What we don’t see is the projected retinal image produced by the picture, the veridical relationships among the particular elements of the undifferentiated sensuous manifold that produced those c ognitive- perceptual expectations!
Gombrich makes several references to J. J. Gibson’s ecological theory of perception in Art and Illusion. Gibson identified the input to perception with an ambient optic array, or a pattern of or-thogonally juxtaposed texture gradients that reflect the relative orientations of different surfaces in the environment. Perception should require no interpretation, no categorization, on this account. The direct registration of information already present in the optic array should suffice to orient our-selves to those surfaces and objects we need to interact with to succeed in our behaviors. Drawings and other kinds of realistic representations, Gibson thought, need only reproduce these aspects of the optic array to succeed in accurately depicting their subjects. There is an improvement over the Kantian model for perception here. An optic array is not a retinal image. It is a representation of information objectively present in the environment. Drawings and other sorts of naturalistic depictions, Gibson thought, reproduce those higher order relations that are constitutive of the
E. H. Gombrich
401
internal structure of an ambient optic array that would have been produced by their subjects in
ordinary perceptual contexts ( Gibson, 1971, 1978).
Gibson’s theory of depiction is quite elegant in its simplicity. Gombrich thought that it was
spot on in its assessment of the importance of texture to depiction. But he argued that there
was an ambiguity of illusion which demonstrated that it could not be the whole story. Consider
the three figures projected in depth in the hallway illusion again. There are two sets of formal
relations salient to the size illusion illustrated in the drawing: the relations among the three figures
themselves and the relation of each figure to the spatial metric of the depicted hallway. The
overall composition of the picture plane is neutral between these two sets of formal relations.
The overallness of the formal pattern of marks rendered on the page doesn’t favor either of the
two. The size illusion occurs because vision naturally fixes on the wrong set for an accurate judgment
about the actual relative size of the three figures. Why does this happen? We recognize that
it is a picture. We know that mathematical perspective is a formal convention regularly used to
depict space in a picture ( and has been for at least 500 years). We are in fact members of a common
visual community that has generally learned to interpret perceived space in terms of this convention
for perspectival projection. So we categorize the picture as an image in perspectival projection.
Once we do we visually fixate on the relationship between each individual figure and the
metric of its locally depicted space. Once we cognitively latch onto the image in this way it is hard
to see it otherwise. The upshot is that our perception of the image isn’t direct as Gibson describes
it. It is cognitively mediated by a shared cultural understanding of perspectival projection that has
been derived from the history of art.
Gombrich’s discussion of art succinctly captures the cognitive dimension of perception. But
there is a wrinkle in his use of the size constancy example. The mechanisms of perceptual constancy
are automatic psychological mechanisms ( Palmer, 1999). They do encode knowledge of the
environment, e.g. that surfaces remain the same color across changes in the brightness and hue of
light or that objects remain the same size despite differences in the apparent metric of local space.
But these mechanisms encode information about the world as reflexive cognitive adaptations that
are keyed to the phylogenetic scale of the evolved structure of perceptual systems. The story Gombrich
tells, in contrast, depends on explicit knowledge of art historical conventions developed
within the ontogenetic timeframe of an individual’s art historical experience. What Gombrich
really needs is an example of the explicit influence of learned concepts and categories and their
explicit influence on perception.
Bi- stable ambiguous figures like the d uck- rabbit figure Gombrich discusses in the introduction
to Art and Illusion can be used to track the influence of explicit categorization processing in perception
( Bonnar, Gosselin, & Schyns, 2002; Gombrich, 1960, p. 5). The optic array that is depicted
in the image is ambiguous between two interpretations ( or three if we add the alloverness of the
optic array itself ). It seems uncontroversial to think that sensory processes directly pick up all the
information encoded in the optic array whenever one looks at the duck rabbit figure. Nonetheless,
one ordinarily perceives either a duck or a rabbit. Not both. Of course, we can learn to switch
back and forth by fixing our attention on different aspects of the drawing … different formal relations
diagnostic for the two different interpretations ( categorizations) of the identity of the figure
( Bonnar et al., 2002). But we cannot see both simultaneously. Why not? The texture gradients
present in the image provide hints, clues, or cues to two possible interpretations of the image.
Which one is perceived depends on how one categorizes the image, which of two concepts one
chooses to use to interpret its content. B i- stable ambiguous figures, therefore, directly illustrate
the influence of cognition in perception.
Gombrich argued that the trick is that all perception is like this. Constructivists appeal to
the inverse projection problem for visual perception to explain why. A w ell- defined function can be
constructed to describe the projection of any t hree- dimensional scene onto a t wo- d imensional
William P. Seeley
402
surface like a photograph. However, the converse is not the case. The two- dimensional pattern produced by that projection is consistent with an infinite set of possible t hree- dimensional con-figurations ( Palmer, 1999). What this entails is that the retinal inputs to visual perception are always ambiguous between any of a large ( theoretically infinite) set of possible three- dimensional interpretations. Constructivists argue that vision is thereby an inferential process. The visual sys-tem identifies the retinal input with the most likely interpretation of its source given the context. A range of variables contribute to this inference in ordinary cases, variables that include general world knowledge and local movements of the agent itself used to disambiguating the relative ori-entations of local spatial cues.
Gombrich, following this general constructivist recipe for perception, argued that cognition is a general influence in all perceptions. Painters and other manual picture makers learn conventional systems designed to harness these cognitive influences in perception. Paintings are therefore illusions of a sort. They are bistable ambiguous images, two- d imensional mosaics of color that lend them-selves to abstract formal, and more or less naturalistic, interpretations. We can switch back and forth between these interpretations, but once a consumer has latched onto a naturalistic interpretation of the image it takes effort to switch back to a two- d imensional design view. What underwrites this ef-fort? An understanding of depiction, a capacity to categorize a canvas or image as a t wo- dimensional pattern of medium- s pecific abstract marks unique to a particular category and style of art.
Contemporary research in the neurophysiology of attention lends support to Gombrich’s ac-count ( see Seeley, 2020). Perception is selective both by nature and necessity. Perceptual systems are limited resource cognitive systems. The world is replete with currently irrelevant informa-tion that sensory systems, left to their own devices, would record relatively indiscriminately. Perceptual systems therefore need a strategy to sort signal from the noise in everyday situations that require m illiseconds- fast reactions on the fly. Biased competition theories of selective at-tention suggest that reciprocal attentional networks provide a mechanism to support just such a strategy ( Desimone & Duncan, 1995; Peelen & Kastner, 2014; Pessoa & Adolphs, 2010). Initial sensory information is fed forward to prefrontal brain regions associated with affective processing and perceptual recognition. These processes are used to generate an initial perceptual hypothesis about the identities of perceived objects, actions, and events. Feedback from prefrontal areas to brain regions associated with sensory processing, in turn, directs attention, biases populations of sensory neurons to the perceptual expectation of features and objects consistent with this initial hypothesis, and inhibits the sensory encoding of potentially distracting information. Subsequent waves of perceptual processing produce error signals that help attentional processes hone in on what is salient to our current behaviors. Perception is the product of multiple waves of this type of hypothesis testing on a time scale measured in the hundreds of milliseconds.
Biased- c ompetition theories of attention suggest that categorizing the d uck- r abbit figure one way or another biases sensory processing to just those perceptible features sufficient to recognize either the duck or the rabbit in the image while at the same time suppressing the encoding of those perceptible features necessary to perceive the other. Artists, on this more contemporary account, learn conventional systems designed to harness the influence of analogous attentional processes in perception.
2 Making, Matching, and the History of Pictures
Gombrich looked for the nature of depiction in the practices of picture makers. His interest in the topic was not a philosopher’s interest in depiction per se. His starting point was rather a question about artistic style: why should representation have a history? If the representational arts were identified with mimesis, or imitation, why should success be such a hard fought achievement and why do we find so many different artistic styles? Why shouldn’t it suffice to simply copy what we
E. H. Gombrich
403
see? His answer to this question emerges in the role he attributed to categorization processing in
perceptual recognition.
Recall that Gombrich objected to the idea that the marked surface of an image might stand in as
a retinal prosthesis of sorts. Constable, he remarked, could not have looked out on the grounds of
Wivenhoe Park and seen an undifferentiated sensuous manifold. What he saw was a house situated
on the grounds of a w ell- heeled estate across the lake from where he sat with his, pencils, pens,
brushes, ink, pigment, medium, canvas, and paper. What Constable needed was a set of attentional
strategies to discern those formal relations within the visual environment sufficient for depiction
and a system of m edium- s pecific productive strategies to render them in a recognizable way.
But in the opposite order.
Students in undergraduate courses in aesthetics learn hackneyed platitudes about art embedded
in traditional theories of aesthetic experience. We naturally learn, so the story goes, to see the
world in terms dictated by our values and interests. When we do so we learn to see past the underlying
essence of objects and events, their true appearances, to their utility to us, their users. Why?
Well. Perception, like the rest of cognition, is an adaptation. It enables us to see the world in a way
that facilitates behaviors that foster flourishing and survival. Perception is a cognitive shortcut of
sorts. What we know of the world we know precisely because it facilitates these kinds of behaviors.
We see the world as we know it. We see past the genuine appearances of things. We perceive
them rather as they have been represented by the visual system for action. We perceive them in
terms of our own biological and culturally unique values and interests. Viewers, for instance,
overestimate the relative size of plates depicted in perspectival projection in depictions of well- set
dinner tables ( Winner, 1982, p. 92). They know the plate has been rendered as an ellipse. But they
see it as a circular object. As a result, they overestimate the height of its rendered form relative to
its width. We might call this a case of constructive misperception. It is a putative misperception
that is useful in real contexts. It facilitates reaching, grabbing, and the concomitant ingestion of
metabolic fodder. Nonetheless, it is a bit of an oddity in the recognizable t wo- d imensional context
of the picture plane. Drawn dinner plates have no biological salience, no natural utility in the
everyday activities associated with survival and flourishing.
Theories of aesthetics traffic in what is often called the myth of the innocent eye. The central tenet
of this myth is the idea that artists must learn to see past cognitive influences in perception to the
true underlying visual form, the natural appearances, of the perceived environment ( Fry, 1920;
Gombrich, 1960; Ruskin, 1857). Aesthetically sensitive viewers, so the story goes, also learn to see
through the veil of cognition and gather glimpses of the true visual world. Artists ( and consumers)
are experts at aesthetic vision. They use the tools of their trade to train their eyes to what the world
really looks like. This capacity for accurate visual analysis is what underwrites depiction.
There’s something to this view of artists’ perceptual abilities. Evidence suggests that expert
training in drawing, for instance, confers an advantage in form recognition, visual analysis, and
perceptual identification tasks ( Kozbelt, 2001; Kozbelt & Seeley, 2007). The metaphysics of the
story is, however, skewed. If categorization processing plays a constitutive role in perception then
viewers can’t see past the conceptual biases of what they know. Seeing is always a form of seeingwith
( concepts) that manifests itself as a seeing-as ( perceptual categorization). The artist’s eye is not
an innocent eye. It is a w ell- trained eye whose behavior is shaped by expert knowledge of the
nature of artistic production in a preferred medium. Artists simply learn to see the world in terms
dictated by the values and interests of their profession.
Gombrich contrasts Constable’s original painting with a child’s copy of the canvas. The child’s
copy of Wivenhoe Park is a rendering of what she knows. L ike- s ized things have been rendered
literally l ike- sized. The artist’s perspective on the rowboat on the lake has been elevated so that it
better captures the craft’s defining features. The house is proportionally scaled to the surrounding
trees on the waterfront. It is a conceptual picture. It renders the information present in the scene
William
P. Seeley
404
as it is perceived. The picture appears quite flat. Everything has been pushed forward to the imag-ined scrim of the picture plane. Gombrich argues that the child’s copy of the painting represents a first step in a putative history of representation. The next step would be for the artist to look again, note the compositional errors present in the copy, and remake the picture, adjusting the composition to compensate for recognizable errors in the appearance of the original.
Making, Gombrich argues, precedes matching. The artist doesn’t make a picture by copying what they perceive. They start by making a picture, seeing where they have gone wrong, and then starting again. The net result is the development of sets of medium- specific conventional schema for representation that an artist can subsequently use to direct attention and shape seeing for draw-ing, painting, photography, etc. Artists do not see past the conceptual apparatus of life to a true underlying visual form. They develop conceptual apparatus that enables them to see the world in a way that facilitates their artistic practices and their behaviors. They learn to see the world as the artwork they are trained to make.
Consumers learn to do this too. They learn to decode the spatial information carried in the picture plane and read the image as a depiction of a scene, object, action, or event rendered in a particular style. They learn to recognize what has been included, what has been omitted, short-cuts, abstractions, and more generally what it means to have rendered the subject of the image in one particular style or another. The exaggeration of scale in a mountain landscape, for instance, is not a distortion per se. It is a perceptual clue, a means to render the apparent grandeur of the depicted landscape for the purpose of conveying a particular attitude toward the natural world. Artistic styles thereby emerge as negotiated communicative strategies in the b ack- a nd- f orth con-versation between artists and consumers ( Gombrich, 1960, p . 196). The history of representation is the history of this negotiation. It is a history of making and matching, of schema and correction, of the development of shared perceptual strategies in the name of artistic communication.
3 An Illusion Theory of Depiction
We are now in position to return to the question we closed the first section with: in what sense is Gombrich’s theory an illusion theory of depiction. Gombrich doesn’t really offer a theory of de-piction. But we can extrapolate one from his writings. Artworks are substitutes ( Gombrich, 1951). They are artifacts that we use as s tand- ins for what they represent in particular, narrow, culturally unique types of behaviors. Their status as representations is a matter of how we use them and what we do with them. Gombrich’s stock illustration is a child’s hobby horse. What makes a stick, broom, or store bought toy a hobby horse is just that it has a compositional structure that allows us to use it as one. It is easy to grab a crooked branch from the backyard and ride it. The branch func-tions in this context as a complex sensorimotor cue that facilitates a range of imaginary behaviors. We might add more or less to it as the occasion required. We might look for a branch that still held some of its leaves to serve as a mane. We might look for one with a big knot to stand- in as an eye. Ultimately what matters is that the relative scale of the parts and their scale relative to the rider make it a fit substitute for a horse in the game they are playing. We let imagination fill out the rest.
Pictures, Gombrich thought, are like this. They encode a range of perceptual cues that allow them to s tand- in for a perceived landscape, person, etc. We recognize that pictures are composed of patterns of charcoal, graphite, ink, pigment suspended in a medium, etc. We can perceive them that way. But we can also perceive them as the scene, object, action, or event they were designed to represent. Which we choose ( or better, how much of each we choose to attend to) is a matter of how we intend to use them. We might look past stylistic formal- compositional features when we use an image as a record of a person, place, thing, event, or action. We might, in contrast, keep recognizable stylistic features in the forefront of our mind when we look at a depiction as an artwork, when the focus of our attention is what it might have meant to render the depicted
E. H. Gombrich
405
subject in one way or another. But, notice, we remain aware of key stylistic attributes of the image
even when we treat it as a record of its subject. We do so even if we don’t explicitly perceive them.
Why? These are the cues that direct us to use the image that way.
The illusion theory of depiction Gombrich seems to have held is a bit more complicated than
the naïve illusion theory philosophers have often attributed to him ( Bantinaki & Hyman, 2017).
Philosophers distinguish between perceptual and cognitive illusions. Perceptual illusions are cognitively
impenetrable ( Currie, 1995). They are not affected by what we believe. A stick in the water
appears bent even though we recognize it is straight. We aren’t fooled by the i llusion – a t least not
once we have been informed of it. But we can’t see it any other way. Cognitive illusions are cases
in which we believe what we see. We are fooled by them. The standard objection to an illusion
theory of depiction is that a) it entails that viewers believe they see the depicted subject in the
picture plane so that b) they are unaware of the features constitutive of its identity as an articulated
two- d imensional design. No one thinks viewers are in the throes of a cognitive illusion when they
recognize the depictive content of an image. Therefore illusion theory is flawed. But, of course,
Gombrich would agree ( see above). He didn’t think consumers were in the throes of a perceptual
illusion in the strong sense of a cognitively impenetrable perceptual experience. Further, he
thought that an awareness of the n on- r epresentational stylistic features of the image, the features
constitutive of its identity as an articulated t wo- d imensional design, underwrite the experience of
the work as an instance of work in a particular, semantically inflected, culturally distinct style. He,
therefore, didn’t think pictures were, strictly speaking, perceptual illusions either.
Objections to Gombrich’s illusion theory reflect intuitions derived from Richard Wollheim’s
notion of two-foldness. Wollheim offered a counter- t heory he saw as an alternative to Gombrich.
He argued that viewers were simultaneously perceptually aware of images as both depictions of scenes
objects actions or events in depth and two- dimensional patterns of marks. If sound this would
mean that the perceivers would be simultaneously perceptually aware of both the subject of a
depiction and the information in the abstract design of the composition constitutive of its artistic
style. The constructivist undertones of Gombrich’s theory certainly run counter to this account.
On the latter theory of perception, one can either see the image as an abstract pattern or a depiction,
one can switch back between the two, but one cannot see both simultaneously. Once one
latches onto a particular categorization what one perceives is ( at least for the moment) fixed. However,
as we have seen, Gombrich did not exclude an explicit, concurrent awareness of the design
features of a composition from his theory.
The disagreement between Gombrich and Wollheim would seem to turn on an empirical
question about the nature of attention and perception. The perceptual recognition literature
would seem to support Gombrich ( see Palmer, 1999). Whereas we may be simultaneously aware
of both the design features and the depictive content of a work we can only attend to one of these
two aspects of the work at a time. However, the contrast between the two views is not as stark as
it is often made out to be. We recognize images, on Gombrich’s account, as depictions of a subject
rendered in a particular style. This may well be resource enough to fold the critical design elements
of twofold experience into the explicit perceptual recognition of the image. Whatever the
case, the perceptual illusion that underwrites Gombrich’s tacit theory of depiction is replete with
formal and semantic information constitutive of different stylistic categories of art. This seems
sufficient to challenge standard objections to the illusionistic tenor of his account of depiction.
Note
1 It is a bit of a misnomer to equate perceptual illusions with perceptual mistakes. A perceptual illusion is
more often than not the result of perceptual systems operating to code in ecologically invalid contexts,
or contexts for which they were not adapted.
William
P. Seeley
406
References
Bantinaki, Katerina & Hyman, John. ( 2017). Depiction. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved Febru-ary24,2010:https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/depiction/
Bonnar, Lizann, Gosselin, Frederic & Schyns, Phillipe G. ( 2002). Understanding Dali’s Slave Market with the Disappearing Bust of Voltaire: A Case Study in the Scale Information Driving Perception. Perception, 31:683–691.
Currie, Gregory. ( 1995). Image and Mind: Film, Philosophy, and Cognitive Science. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Desimone, Robert & Duncan, John. ( 1995). The Neural Mechanisms of Visual Attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience,18:193–222.
Fry, Roger. (1920/1959). Vision and Design. New York: Meridian Books.
Gibson, J. J. ( 1971). The Information Available in Pictures. Leonardo, 4(1): 27–35.
Gibson, J. J. ( 1978). The Ecological Approach to the Visual Perception of Pictures. Leonardo,11(3):227–235.
Gombrich, E. H. ( 1936). Eine Kurze Weltgeschichte Für Junge Leser. Germany: Dumont.
Gombrich, E. H. ( 1950). The Story of Art. New York: Phaidon Press.
Gombrich, E. H. ( 1951). Meditations on a Hobby Horse or the Roots of Artistic Form. Reprinted in Meditations on a Hobby Horse. New York: Phaidon Press, 1962
Gombrich, E. H. ( 1960). Art and Illusion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gombrich, E. H. ( 1963). Meditations on a Hobby Horse. New York: Phaidon Press.
Gombrich, E. H. ( 1981). The Image and the Eye: Further Studies in the Psychology of Pictorial Representation. New York: Phaidon Press.
Kant, Immanuel. (1790/1953). The Critique of Judgment. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kozbelt, Aaron. ( 2001). Artists as Experts in Visual Cognition. Visual Cognition,8(6):705–723.
Kozbelt, Aaron & Seeley, William P. ( 2007). Integrating Art Historical, Psychological, and Neuroscientific Explanations of Artists’ Advantages in Drawing and Perception. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity and the Arts, 1(2): 80–90.
Palmer, Stephen E. ( 1999). Vision Science: From Photons to Phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Peelen, Maurius V. & Kastner, Sabine. ( 2014). Attention in the Real World: Towards Understanding its Neural Basis. Trends in Cognitive Science, 18(5): 242–250.
Pessoa, Luiz & Adolphs, Ralph. ( 2010). Emotion Processing and the Amygdala: From a ‘ Low Road’ to ‘ Many Roads’ of Evaluating Biological Significance. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,11(11):773–783.
Ruskin, John. (1857/1971). The Elements of Drawing. New York: Dover Publications.
Seeley, William P. ( 2020). Attentional Engines: A Perceptual Theory of the Arts. New York: Oxford University Press.
Winner, Ellen. ( 1982). Invented Worlds: The Psychology of Art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-47 407
39RICHARD WOLLHEIM
Derek Matravers
1 Introduction
Richard Wollheim was born in 1923 in London to a German- Jewish father and an English mother. He served in the war, after which he returned to Oxford to study History and PPE. There he met A.J. Ayer, who, in 1949, on the slender evidence of only four terms of study of philosophy, gave him a job at University College London. Wollheim spent the bulk of his career at UCL, becoming Grote Professor in 1963 and remaining in the department until 1982 when he moved to America. In 2003 he returned to London, where he died later that year. Wollheim has been described as ‘ one of the most original, creative and courageous philosophers of his time’ ( Budd 2005: 245). He generally worked outside of the intellectual mainstream of philosophy, which did not prevent his work from receiving acclaim. He was formidable in many respects; he was culturally extremely sophisticated, socially well- connected, possessed a vast knowledge of both past and contemporary art, and had w ell- p laced confidence in his own judgement. He wore these assets lightly, and, to his many friends, was charming and excellent company.
Wollheim published widely in philosophy, with work in political philosophy, the philosophy of mind, psychoanalysis, and ethics. However, his principal interest was in the philosophy of art, particularly as concerned painting, and it is that on which I will focus in this entry. There is a re-markable consistency in his ideas; many of the themes which surface in this first book, Art and Its Objects, are returned to in later writings. I shall consider his contribution under five headings: the ontology of art; painting as an art; representation, expression, and visual delight; interpretation; and his contribution to modernist art theory.
2 Ontology
The structure of Art and Its Objects is provided by Wollheim’s attempt to answer the core q uestion – what is art? He beings with ‘ a natural starting point’: the ‘ physical object hypothesis’: the view that works of art are physical objects. Wollheim considers two criticisms that can be made of this view. The first is that, for some works of art, there is no physical object which is a plausible candidate to be that work of art and the second is that art generally has properties ( that is ‘ moves with life’ for example) which could not be properties of a physical object. I shall take each in turn.
Wollheim agrees that, in one sense, there is no physical object which is a plausible candidate to be a novel or to be a piece of music. These works of art are repeatable: different instances each of which are Jane Austen’s Emma can be found in any decent library. Different instances each of
Derek Matravers
408
which are Mozart’s Gran Partita can be heard in living rooms and concert halls throughout the
world. Wollheim borrows a distinction from Pierce and identifies the work of art with a type,
of which its instances are tokens. The distinction can be roughly grasped if one understands that
the word ‘ book’ has four tokens of letter but only three types of letter. Wollheim gives a careful
discussion of types and tokens, differentiating them from other pairs such as a class and its members
or a universal and its instances ( Wollheim 1980: 74– 84). Nonetheless, the metaphysics of the
position has proved challenging and subject to ongoing debate. There are a number of problems.
In apparent contrast to works of art, types are eternal, and hence cannot be created. Furthermore,
we cannot experience types ( at least not qua types) and yet we can experience works of art. With
proponents on either side of the divide, the debate does not look as if it will be resolved any time
soon.
Wollheim’s reply to the second criticism has spawned not one debate but several. The general
form of the r eply – w hich, not for the only time in his writing, reveals Wollheim’s broadly
Humean o utlook – is to show that the claims we make about works of art are compatible with the
works of art being physical objects. The general strategy is to give accounts in terms of the physical
world and human interactions with the physical world which both explain and justify such claims.
The mere existence of such accounts does not entail the physical object hypothesis. However, they
are enough to deal with the argument that claims we make about works of art commit us to the
existence of properties that cannot, by their nature, be properties of physical objects. Wollheim’s
accounts – particularly of representation and of expression – emerge as fully- fledged theories in
their own right ( of which more below).
The claim that some works of art are types and some are tokens, and that the tokens are physical
objects, does not really illuminate the issue of what is distinctive about art. This emerges piecemeal
throughout Wollheim’s work. However, it is worth alluding to a discussion in Art and Its
Objects of art as a ‘ form of life’; a claim that gets further exploration in his later book, The Thread
of Life ( in particular Chapter 7) ( Wollheim 1986). The peg upon which this discussion hangs is
whether what unifies the practice of art is it being the result of some ‘ artistic urge’, akin to the
sexual urge. Wollheim’s reply is that human beings indeed have urges that are relevant; in particular,
the urge to repair early psychic fracture. However, this does not directly manifest itself in
artistic activity. Rather, there needs to be in place a complex network of social activities and, in
particular, some vehicles through which such urges can manifest themselves as art. Accounting
for quite how we ended up with the vehicles that we did, such as stretched canvas or carved stone,
Wollheim names ‘ the bricolage problem’. There is an element of arbitrariness as to which vehicles
we have, although any such will require properties such as being at least somewhat durable and
not consumed in appreciation ( Wollheim 1980: 110). Hence, a picture emerges of complex human
needs for externalisation, with complex social structures through which such externalisations result
in what we know as works of art.
3 Painting as an Art
It seems, from the immediate forgoing, that the sphere of art will be drawn narrowly. The Sunday
painter, or the person producing views of Montparnasse for tourists, does not seem to be working
through some complex human trauma. Wollheim accepts this consequence. He holds that the
‘ folk’ category of art is unreasonably broad. For Wollheim, ‘ work of art’ is an evaluative category;
furthermore, it is a highly evaluative category. He opens his 1987 book, Painting as an Art, by enumerating
those people who paint but do not produce art: Sunday painters; people who paint for
relaxation or distraction; forgers; n on- human animals; people who paint as a result of art therapy;
children – e ven if they produce work of ‘ explosive beauty’; painters of street scenes, of Mediterranean
ports, of still- l ife, of ‘ mammoth abstractions, whose works hang in old- f ashioned restaurants
Richard Wollheim
409
or modern banks, in the foyer of international hotels and the offices of exorbitant lawyers’. This
final category ‘ once, probably, were artists but… now paint exclusively for money and the pleasure
of others’ ( Wollheim 1987: 13).
To produce a work of art, an artist needs to produce it intentionally – under some description;
in particular, under the description ‘ work of art’ ( the artist has grasped this concept by participating
in the form of life described above) ( Wollheim 1970: 113). The intention is reflexive; that
is, the painter intends viewers of the painting to have an experience which discloses the painter’s
intention. The content of the intention is complex; it will include ‘ desires, beliefs, emotions,
commitments, wishes … some of these psychological factors arise deep from the artist’s psyche
[and] some are unthinkable outside the history and traditions of painting’ ( Wollheim 1987: 8).
This does not explain why the benchmark for producing a painting that is art has been set so high;
could not a Sunday painter produce a painting with the intentions described above? A full answer
to that question needs to wait for the discussion on intention and interpretation; a shorter answer
can be provided here.
The Sunday painter is excluded by the fact that, in producing art, the painter externalises a
highly complex constellation of mental states onto the artistic medium in a controlled and scaffolded
manner. The task of the viewer is to retrieve the intentions behind this externalisation from
the work in front of them. In contrast with interpreting language, there is no structure to provide
a scaffold for the retrieval of these intentions. How does the viewer know that the configuration
of a particular line is accident, luck, or intended? The answer is that the viewer needs to interpret
that work within the constraint of assuming the work was produced by someone with a style; it
was produced by a ‘ style process’.
A style process can be divided into three different items or aspects. First, there is the schema or
universal, under with the painter brings some part of the pictorial resources available to him.
Secondly, there is a rule or instruction for placing, or otherwise operating on, those pictorial
resources which the schema picks out. Third, there is the acquired disposition to act on the rule,
where this disposition is, generally, not just psychological but psychomotor.
( Wollheim 1993c: 176)
Thus Wollheim was unimpressed by those philosophical thought experiments that relied on comparing
an object which is a work of art, with an indiscernible counterpart that is a ‘ mere real
thing’.1 The work of art is interpretable, and the mere real thing is uninterpretable. Of the latter,
he says ‘ we are likely to feel that we don’t know what to make of, or what weight to attach to,
whatever shows up on the painted support’ ( Wollheim 1993c: 174).
4 Representation, Expression, and Visual Delight
As stated above, Wollheim was committed to showing how claims made within criticism about
art such as painting and sculpture could be true of a physical object. However, the interest of his
accounts transcends such motivation – what he gives us are accounts of visual representation ( also
known as ‘ depiction’) and expression. Wollheim also deals, rather too briefly, on a third capacity
of the spectator on which the artist relies; the capacity for ‘ visual delight’.
In Art and Its Objects, Wollheim’s analysis of depiction was in terms of an interpretation of
Wittgensteinian ‘ s eeing- a s’. This shifted to an analysis in terms of ‘ s eeing- i n’ – and I shall deal
only with the later version. Let us take as our example a painting Wollheim much admired:
Ingres’s Madame Moitessier. What is it for the worldly object, the painted canvas, to be a picture of
a Madame Moitessier? Wollheim’s approach is to define depiction in terms of the experience to
which it gives rise ( seeing- in) and to provide a ‘ standard of correctness’.
Derek Matravers
410
Let us consider the experience first. There are two key facts about it that provide the sub-stance of Wollheim’s account. The first is that it is distinctively visual. The second is that it has a distinctive phenomenological feature: that of ‘ twofoldness’. When we look at the picture have a single experience with two aspects. First, I am visually aware of a rather w ell- d ressed w oman – which Wollheim calls ‘ the recognitional aspect’. Second, I am visually aware of the surface of the painting – what Wollheim calls ‘ the configurational aspect’. Although the account is perceptual, and Wollheim is content to describe the two aspects in terms of ‘ visual awareness’, my awareness of the woman ( the recognitional aspect) cannot be equated with an experience of seeing a woman face-to-face.2 The first, quite simply, is that it is not true to phenomenology. Seeing a picture of a woman and seeing a woman face- t o- face are ( discounting marginal cases) very different experi-ences. The second is that if either aspect were akin to a simple face- to- face experience, we would not be able to account for the relation of the two aspects within a single experience. It is not pos-sible for me to have a visual face- t o- f ace experience in which I represent what is in front of me both as a woman and as a painted surface. The two aspects of seeing- in borrow some, but not all, of the properties of the respective face- to- face experiences. One difference is that it is possible to have both aspects of the visual experience simultaneously.
According to Wollheim, s eeing- in is a natural capacity we have which we exercise when we see horsemen in stained walls, dancers in frosty panes of glass, or great Wagnerian conductors in clouds. Hence, seeing- in is both logically and historically prior to representation but is not yet representation. To become representation it needs something else; a standard of correctness. That is, we are correct to see a woman in Ingres’s painting, in a way in which it does not make sense to say we are correct to see dancers in the frosty pane of glass or a conductor in the clouds. The standard is set ‘ by the intentions of the artist in so far as they are fulfilled’ ( Wollheim 1987: 48). The condition is important. The intentions set the standard of correctness only to the ex-tent that what the artists intend to be seen in the painting can actually be seen in the painting. Hence, to answer our question: Ingres’s canvas is a picture of a woman because ( a) a viewer can see a woman in the painting and ( b) Ingres intended that a viewer could see a woman in the painting.
Granting the standard of correctness for the moment, we can summarise the position as holding that a painted surface is a representation if depth can be seen in it. That is, the viewer is simultane-ously aware of the t wo- d imensional painted surface but also the t hree- d imensional pictorial space it supports. By contrast, the surface of an ordinary painted wall is seen only as a two- dimensional painted surface. This has consequences that some might find counterintuitive. First, all paintings are representational. This is not to deny ( as it would be absurd to deny) that the pictorial space of some paintings features such things as ‘ a man, a horse, a bowl of fruit, the sky, the death of an animal’ and the pictorial space of other paintings features coloured solids that do not represent such things ( Wollheim 1987: 21). However, this is a distinction within representation between figurative paintings and abstract paintings. Second, instances of tromp l’oeil are not paintings, as there is no configurational aspect to the experience. Third, canvasses in which depth cannot be seen ( perhaps the black canvasses by Ad Reinhardt) are not paintings as there is no recognitional aspect to the experience. Wollheim embraced each of these three consequences.
Wollheim’s account has been subject to a great deal of criticism.3 The principal complaint is that the nature of the recognitional aspect of the experience is wholly unspecified. The issue is that the only grasp we have of the recognitional aspect, the only experience which can provide us with the description we have of it, is a ( counterfactual) face- t o- f ace experience of a woman. However, Wollheim is adamant that there is no relation between seeing a woman in the picture and seeing a woman f ace- t o- f ace ( although he does allow, wisely, that there can be causal traffic between the aspect of the experience and the experience). For him, ‘ the particular complexity that one kind of experience has and the other lacks makes their phenomenology incommensurate’ ( Wollheim
Richard
Wollheim
411
1987: 47). However, if nothing can be said about the nature of the experience then, despite the
fact that Wollheim could ( and did) claim that we were nonetheless familiar with it, the theory has
a lacuna at its heart – familiarity is not understanding.
The other important category of properties possessed by paintings is expressive properties.
As with representational properties these are, according to Wollheim, visual. What it is to see a
painting as melancholy is for us to see it as ‘ corresponding to’ melancholy. So far, this appears to
be a constitutive account of expression; what is meant by saying that a painting is melancholy is
that it has a melancholy look about it ( compare ( Lopes 2005)). Wollheim fills out his claim by
providing an account of how such a ‘ correspondence’ comes about. This draws on his background
in psychoanalytic theory. He borrows from this the notion of projection, which, he claims, comes
in two sorts: simple projection and complex projection. Simple projection occurs when an individual
( A) is has an emotion that he or she cannot tolerate – l et us stay with the example of
melancholy – which A projects onto some other individual in A’s environment ( B). This results in
an unjustified belief ( that B is themselves melancholy) and some remission in A’s own condition.
Complex projection occurs when A projects a feeling or emotion onto the external world. This
complex projection generates new properties, projective properties, which the viewer perceives as
properties of the world. This experience, which has both a cognitive and affective component, is
the experience of the world as corresponding to the emotion.
Unlike simple projection the ‘ target’ of complex projection is not random; the part of the
external world on which the feeling or emotion is projected must have features that encourage
and sustain the projection. However, if so, what does projection add? Why not simply rest with
the claim that it is that parts of the world that show an affinity with our feeling or emotions that
are expressive? Wollheim claims that the experience of projective properties ‘ intimates its own
history’ – i t intimates that it derives from an experience of p rojection – w hich will ‘ organise and
structure the perception’. However, this only makes prominent a difficulty for the account. It is
implausible to hold that all experiences of expression are preceded by the projection of an occurrent
felt feeling or emotion. To overcome this problem, Wollheim claims that the experience
of projective properties does not intimate a particular instance of expression, but ‘ intimate how
experiences of this sort originate’ ( Wollheim 1991: 153).
The account has been subject to a number of criticisms.4 First, even if we grant a notion of
simple projection, the notion of complex projection is simply assumed and not explained; it has no
precedent in the psychoanalytic literature. Second, Wollheim never satisfactorily explains what
it is for the experience of expression to intimate that it derives from an experience of projection.
Finally, the exact nature of the account remains elusive. Is it a constitutive account ( saying what is
meant by ‘ the picture is melancholy’) or a causal account ( saying how we come to be in the right
condition to truly make such a claim)? If both, what is the relation between them?
The last of the three ‘ fundamental perceptual capacities that the artist relies upon the spectator
to have and to use’ is ‘ visual delight’: ‘ the power to induce a special form of pleasure’. Unlike depiction
and expression, to which Wollheim returned on many occasions in many different contexts,
he seems only to have dealt with visual delight once – in Painting as an Art. Its importance for him
is that ‘ a large part of the cultural… value of painting practiced as an art, as of any other art, it
that it transforms our capacity to experience pleasure’ ( Wollheim 1987: 45). Rather than telling
us the nature of this pleasure, or its transformation, he instead discusses three sources of visual
delight. The first is the interplay between the contents of our experiences of a representation and
of what, in the real world, is represented. We start with the real world which raises interest in what
is represented but then move from the nature of the representation to experience the real world
differently. The second is the interplay between ‘ how what at one moment seems an image at the
next moment dissolves into a paint surface without meaning’; that is, the interplay ‘ detail’ and
‘ a more comprehensive, a more distanced, view of the marked surface’. Finally, there is the fact
Derek Matravers
412
that ‘ paintings draw upon synesthetic associations with what we see… Much of Venetian painting depends on remembered sound, much of Courbet depends on remembered silence’ ( Wollheim 1987: 100).
For Wollheim, representation and expressive properties are the fundamental perceptual prop-erties that constitute our experience of pic tures – a long, of course, with the experience of visual delight. However, he has more to say about the means by which paintings achieve the status of bearers of meaning. I shall merely sketch these here, rather than go into them in depth.
For some pictures, it is appropriate for our experience to include a ‘ spectator in the picture’, that is, a spectator located in the virtual space a painting represents. The function of such a spectator is ‘ to allow the spectator of the picture distinctive access to the content of the picture’ ( Wollheim 1987: 129).
There are ways in which a ‘ new kind of content’ can enter a painting. The first, which Woll-heim calls ‘ the way of textuality’, occurs when some text, some propositional content, such as ‘ a religious doctrine, a proverb, a cosmological theory, a more principle, a metaphor, a world view’ ( Wollheim 1987: 187). The second, which he calls ‘ the way of borrowing’, means that ‘ a certain motif or image has been borrowed from earlier art’. However, this is not a matter of sim-ply ‘ cutting and pasting’ some content so as to add meaning. Wollheim proposes the following conditions:
First, that a text enters the content of a painting only if, in representing some event that is connected with that text, the painting also reveals what the text means to the artist. Secondly, that a borrowing enters the content of a painting only if, in putting to new use some motif or image from earlier art, the painting reveals what this borrowing means to the artist’.
( Wollheim 1987: 188)
In addition to the kinds of meaning already considered ( representational, expressive, textual, and historical), Wollheim also considers paintings to have ‘ secondary meaning’ which is to do with the way the artist makes the painting. This discussion draws heavily on Wollheim’s psychoanalytic background – a lthough that is not too far away in any of his work. The secondary meaning ‘ comes about because of what the act by means of which the artist gives the picture meaning means to him’ ( Wollheim 1987: 304). The case study Wollheim gives is of Ingres, and the secondary mean-ing follows from the painter endowing his activity with ‘ instrumentality’: what it means to him, unconsciously, is a way of altering the world in a way that stems from the ‘ great psychic drama’ of psychosexual development.
The final way in which a painting can gain content or meaning is ‘ the way of metaphor’: the painting is a metaphor for, as opposed to a representation of, some part of the world. Wollheim’s claim is not that the content of a painting ( a river, for example) is the content of a metaphor ( life, for example). That would be a special case of ‘ the way of textuality’ ( Wollheim 1987: 308). Rather, properties of the picture themselves serve as a metaphor for, say, corporeality. The general point is rather elusive. Wollheim supplies some examples. A painting, and the elements therein, can be thought of – metaphorically – a s a container and thing contained in a container. That bodies can be thought of this way will ‘ contribute… to the overall effect of corporeality’ ( Wollheim 1987: 314).
5 Interpretation
Wollheim did not have a general theory of interpretation, by which I mean a theory that applied to all the arts. He did, however, provide an account of ‘ criticism’; the word he used to refer to the process of coming to understand a particular work: ‘ The task of criticism is the reconstruction
Richard Wollheim
413
of the creative process, where the creative process must in turn be thought of as something not
stopping short of, but terminating on, the work of art itself ’ ( Wollheim 1980: 185). This is the flip
side of Wollheim’s view as to what constitutes ‘ painting as an art’. Above, I claimed that a necessary
condition for being such was that the work was the result of an extremely complex intention.
Hence, coming to understand the work is at least coming to a position of being able to say what
that intention was; of being able to ‘ reconstruct’ it as part of ‘ reconstructing the creative process’.
The qualifier ( at least) is because recreating the creative process is broader than simply recreating
the artist’s intentions. The critic needs to understand both ‘ the various vicissitudes to which the
artist’s intentions are subject’ and also ‘ the many background beliefs, conventions, and modes of
artistic production against which the artist forms his intention’. It follows from this that the critic’s
reconstruction may not even concur with the artist’s intention, even if that intention will always
be central to the task of reconstruction ( Wollheim 1980: 2 00– 201).
Wollheim’s view can be explicated by comparing it to a rival, the ‘ scrutiny view’. The scrutiny
view holds that all that is needed for criticism is scrutiny of the manifest properties of the work
itself. The argument for this can be put in the form of a dilemma. Any property that is put forward
as relevant for understanding a work is either manifest in the work or it is not. If it is, then it will
be captured by scrutiny. If it is not, it is not part of the work and hence irrelevant.
The arguments Wollheim provides to show the superiority of his view over the scrutiny view
are revealing of his overall approach to the philosophy of art. He takes the scrutiny view to be fundamentally
misguided in simply starting with the work as it is and being interested in the creative
process, if at all, only to the extent that it explains how the work ended up like that. Wollheim, by
contrast, argues that we should understand the work. In doing so, we need to bring together two
different aims which might be thought to be in tension: understanding the creative process in all
its complexity and deepening our perceptual understanding of the work, of what we see before us.
Wollheim claims that understanding the creative process will include
Such issues as how much of the character of the work is be design, how much has come about
through changes of intention, and what were the ambitions that went into its making but
were not realised in the final product.
( Wollheim 1980: 192)
The apparent tension arises because ( for example) it appears as if our understanding of why a property
is absent ( not realised) cannot possibly deepen our perceptual understanding ( as we cannot
perceive an absence).
The tension is resolved by denying that, in the relevant sense, we cannot perceive an absence.
In coming to understand the creative process we come to perceive the work correctly. So, to
take one of Wollheim’s examples, understanding that Rodin’s Monument to Balzac started off as a
nude sculpture changes our perception of i t – p utting the matter very crudely, we see it ( amongst
many other things) as a-sculpture-that-could-have-been-a-nude (Wollheim 1980: 191). Limning
the differences between this view and the scrutiny view enables Wollheim to raise several issues
that are key to the practice of criticism, such as the nature of the critic, the limits of what critical
information is relevant, and the content of perception.
In a lecture written at about the same time as the paper we have been considering, Wollheim
links his view of criticism with his view of evaluation of works of art. In a claim that is b reathtaking
in its audacity, he says ‘ while there are several ways in which the activity of making the
work can detract from its significance, there is only one way in which it can add to it’. The
creative process adds to the significance of the work when it involves those difficult but positive
processes such as ‘self-knowledge, self-change, and self-reparation’. This occurs when ‘the work
of art reflects with sufficient precision some complex constellation of mental inner states which
Derek
Matravers
414
the artist seeks to externalise’ ( Wollheim 1979: 11). A complex, interesting, and ( for want of a better word) healthy creative process contributes to the significance of the work. Correlatively, there are many ways in which this process can go wrong; if so, understanding the creative pro-cess is understanding something which has failed. First, this can be because ‘ the work of art may insufficiently, too imprecisely, fit that internal states it comes to reflect… something felt to be shameful, or degrading, or frightening, something… whose outward manifestation could not be steadily contemplated, fails to get externalised’. Second, it can be because the fit between inner and outer leaves nothing to be desired. The problem in this case is that ‘ the artist has externalised some mental constellation so as to rid himself of it’. By doing this, rather than working through it, there is no gain in s elf- knowledge ( Wollheim 1979: 11– 12).
Even on this small sketch of the various views Wollheim took, one can see how it fits together into a single overall view. To paint as an art is to work through a creative process, rather than simply produce a piece of carved stone or painted canvas. This can only be done once a style has developed, otherwise, it will be uninterpretable. Criticism is a matter of understanding this pro-cess, and evaluation is, at least in part, grounded in the quality of that process of externalisation.
6 Contributions to Modernist Art Theory
In 1961, the hugely influential American critic, Clement Greenberg, published ‘ Modernist Paint-ing’ in which he provided what could be read as a theory of modernist visual art; a systematic account of what it was attempting to achieve ( Greenberg 1961). The exact line of argument is unclear, and Greenberg frequently asserted that he had been misunderstood. Whatever the truth of that matter, the paper had a great deal of influence. The overriding thought was the role of each artistic medium was to distinguish itself from every other artistic medium. Past figurative art, by virtue of being figurative, dealt in illusions and, in doing so, concealed its identity as an object: ‘ Realistic, naturalistic art had dissembled the medium, using art to conceal art; Modernism used art to call attention to art’. Modernists gave up dealing with illusory space so as to draw attention to those properties unique to it; the nature of the support: frame, canvas and so on: ‘ Because flat-ness was the only condition painting shared with no other art, Modernist painting oriented itself to flatness as it did to nothing else’ ( Greenberg 1961: 309). To some extent, this theory still carries influence – I have often heard versions of it from those introducing avant- g arde art to a generally uncomprehending public.
In ‘ The Work of Art as Object’, published nine years later, Wollheim confronted this view. Although he does not name Greenberg, instead directing his attention to ‘ a theory [which] un-derlies or regulates much of the art activity of our age’, it is clear who Wollheim has in mind. He brings forward three objections which are not only devastating to Greenberg’s view but also ( as before) reveal something of Wollheim’s own attitude to painting. First, he rejects Greenberg’s claim that painters before 1905 were concerned with producing illusions and paid attention to the surface only for the purposes of concealing it. Empirical and theoretical considerations show that painters ‘ have [always] shown had a clear predilection for the values of surface, and they have employed selected means to bring out the physical qualities of what they were working on or with’ ( Wollheim 1970: 120). The second objection is that the instruction to painters that follows from Greenberg’s view, ‘ Make us aware or conscious of the surface’, is underspecified. We need to be told what kind of surface is in question. The answer, obviously, is that ‘ the theory is irreducibly or ineliminably referring to the surface of a painting’ ( Wollheim 1970: 121). This leads directly to the third objection: given that what painters are dealing with ( and, recalling the first objection, what they have always been dealing with) is the fact that the surface is the surface of a painting, we are in the familiar, if highly complex and fraught, world of how to make a painting.
Richard Wollheim
415
To talk of the use of the surface and to contrast this with the fact of the surface, and to
identify the former rather than the latter as the characteristic preoccupation of modern art,
attributes to modern art a complexity of concern that it cannot renounce. For it is only if
we assume such a complexity that there is any sense in which we can think of the surface as
being used.
( Wollheim 1970: 125)
For Wollheim ( and also for thinkers such as Leo Steinberg ( Steinberg 1968)) the nature of the
activity of painting does not suffer any great fracture with the advent of Modernism.
7 Conclusion
As I said at the beginning of this paper, Wollheim was a man of great sophistication and great
personal charm. He is probably unique in philosophy in thinking that the value of art was more
secure and less questionable than moral value (‘ I am surprised that philosophers make little of the
fact that, although good art is more likeable than bad art, virtuous people do not enjoy this same
advantage’ ( Wollheim 1993b: x)). For him, art was an immensely serious business and his engagement
with it was profound. This is reflected in his philosophical writing on art, which has a depth
to it that makes engaging with it difficult, but inevitably rewarding.
Notes
1 A view propounded by Arthur Danto ( Danto 1981). For Wollheim’s view on Danto, see ( Wollheim
1993a).
2 Wollheim seems to allow that the configurational aspect is a f ace- to- face experience: ‘ our awareness of
the marked surface itself ’ ( Wollheim 1987: 73). It is difficult to see how this is compatible with his claims
about the complexity of ‘ seeing in’. See ( Budd 1992: 270).
3 A small selection would include ( Budd 1992; Hopkins 1998; Lopes 2004).
4 See ( Budd 2001; Freeman 2012).
References
Budd, Malcolm. 1992. ‘ On Looking at a Picture.’ In J. Hopkins and A. Savile ( eds.), Psychoanalysis, Mind and
Art: Perspectives on Richard Wollheim. Blackwell: Oxford.
——— . 2001. ‘ Wollheim on Correspondence, Projective Properties and Expressive Perception.’ In Rob van
Gerwen (ed.), Richard Wollheim on the Art of Painting. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
———. 2005. ‘Richard Arthur Wollheim: 1923–2003’, Proceedings of the British Academy, 130: 227–246.
Danto, Arthur. 1981. The Transfiguration of the Commonplace. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA and
London.
Freeman, Daniel. 2012. Art’s Emotions: Ethics, Expression and Aesthetic Experience. Acumen: Durham.
Greenberg, Clement. 1961. ‘ Modernist Painting.’ In Francis Frascina and Jonathan Harris ( eds.), Art in Modern
Culture: An Anthology of Critical Texts. Phaidon: London.
Hopkins, Robert. 1998. Picture, Image and Experience. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Lopes, Dominic McIvor. 2004. Understanding Pictures. Clarendon Press: Oxford.
———. 2005. Sight and Sensibility: Evaluating Pictures. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Steinberg, L. 1968. “ Other Criteria.” In Other Criteria: Confrontations with Twentieth Century Art, 55–91.
Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Wollheim, Richard. 1970. ‘ The Work of Art as Object.’ In On Art and the Mind. Allen Lane: London.
———. 1979. ‘ The Sheep and the Ceremony.’ In The Mind and Its Depths. Harvard University Press: Cambridge,
MA.
———. 1980. Art and Its Objects. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
———. 1986. The Thread of Life. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
———. 1987. Painting as an Art. Thames and Hudson: London.
Derek
Matravers
416
———. 1991. ‘ Correspondence, Projective Properties and Expression in the Arts.’ In The Mind and its Depths. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
——— . 1993a. ‘ Danto’s Gallery of Indiscernibles.’ In Mark Rollins ( ed.), Danto and His Critics. Blackwell: Oxford.
———. 1993b. The Mind and Its Depths. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
——— . 1993c. ‘ Pictorial Style: Two Views.’ In The Mind and Its Depths. Harvard University Press: Cam-bridge, MA.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-48 417
40ARTHUR DANTO
Noël Carroll
Arthur Danto ( 1924– 2013) was born in Ann Arbor, Michigan and was raised in Detroit. He served in the United States Army for two years during World War II. He went to Wayne State University on the GI Bill, majoring in art and art history. He was planning to become an artist, specifically a printmaker working in the expressionist vein. After college, however, he enrolled in the philosophy department of Columbia University, writing his Ph.D. under the direction of Ernest Nagel, an eminent philosopher of science in the tradition of logical positivism. Ultimately, Danto decided for a career in philosophy rather than art.
Despite his artistic background, most of Danto’s early publications did not focus on art. Sev-eral of his initial books tackled central topics in philosophy, including his Analytical Philosophy of Knowledge(1968),Analytical Philosophy of Action(1973),Analytical Philosophy of History ( 1965), and What Philosophy Is ( 1968). With Sidney Morgenbesser, Danto also c o- edited Philosophy of Science: Readings(1960).
Danto’s first published work in the philosophy of art was the much- anthologized essay “ The Artworld;” his first book in the philosophy of art was The Transfiguration of the Commonplace(1981).After that, the bulk of his writing concentrated on art.
That Danto’s earlier writings were not primarily about art was important for the historical development of philosophical aesthetics in the Anglophone world. That D anto – along with fig-ures like Nelson Goodman and Richard Wollheim – were already recognized as accomplished practitioners in more “ central” branches of p hilosophy – r aised the prestige of aesthetics in general when they turned their attention to art. That each became professionally, deeply engaged with the fine arts was especially significant for the anthology you are now reading.
Danto’s contributions to the study of art come primarily in three interrelated areas: the defini-tion of art, the philosophy of art history, and his approach to art criticism.
The definition of art. Although Danto did not propose a definition of art in his essay “ The Artworld,” it was nevertheless a crucial contribution to the discussion of the definition of art in several respects, and not only in terms of its introduction of the philosophical concept of the very useful idea of an “ artworld.”
A key notion in “ The Artworld” is that of i ndiscernibility – specifically the insight that art-works can be indiscernible from real things. For example, Andy Warhol’s Brillo Box, an artwork, is indiscernible from Proctor and Gamble’s, a mere packing carton. That is, one putatively could not tell by looking at them which one was the artwork. But Warhol’s is; it possesses properties that Proctor and Gamble’s doesn’t. For example, Warhol’s Brillo Box is about art; Proctor and Gamble’s is merely about Brillo.
Noël
Carroll
418
That what made something art might be imperceptible unhorsed two major tendencies of
thinking in the prevailing discussion of the definition of art. Previously, traditional definitions of
art had been stated in terms of properties detectable by the senses: representation, expression, and
form ( or significant form). But that approach was no longer available once Danto showed that an
essential feature of art could not be identified by the senses.
Yet the relevance of indiscernibility to the determination of art status also scotched what is
called the Neo- W ittgenstein tendency in the philosophy of art. That view claimed that art cannot
be defined, in opposition to the traditional view alluded to in the preceding paragraph, and, in
contrast, asserted that artworks were actually to be identified by recognizing family resemblances
between works already previously categorized as artworks and prospective candidates. Inspect the
novel artworks for their resemblances to previously acknowledged works of art; just “ look and
see,” the N eo- Wittgenstein recommended. But if artworks are indiscernible from real things, as
Danto showed, looking would be ultimately irrelevant to establishing art status.
The indiscernibility thesis revealed something deeply significant about the project of defining
art; whatever properties defined art would be nonmanifest properties. In “T he Artworld,” Danto
proposed one such property – an atmosphere of theory and art history.
This suggestion profoundly shifted the direction of art theorizing insofar as subsequently much
of it looked to contextual features, such as institutional factors, as key to defining art. One very
influential development was George Dickie’s Institutional Theory of Art ( 1974). Although Danto’s
view of the art world was distinct from Dickie’s, the two were often conflated. This, however, was a
mistake inasmuch as Dickie’s notion of the art world was sociological whereas Danto’s was historical.
In the decade or so that followed the publication of “T he Artworld,” Danto wrote some articles
on aesthetics, but he did not present a t horough-g oing theory of art, replete with an implicit definition,
until the publication of his Transfiguration of the Commonplace (1 981). The essentialist stance
of this book surprised many readers. Perhaps because Danto had written about philosophers like
Nietzsche and Sartre as well as Hindu mysticism, many had assumed that Danto did not subscribe
to the analytical approach to philosophy.
The definition of art detailed in Transfiguration of the Commonplace was very complex but implicit.
However, in his After the End of Art ( 1997), Danto propounded an explicit theory of art, one
highly reminiscent of Hegel’s. Stated formulaically, Danto maintains that something is a work of
art only if it is made with the intention that ( 1) that it is about something or has content and ( 2)
that content is presented or articulated in a form that is appropriate to it.1
By aboutness or content, Danto has in mind the possession of a meaning – a theme, a thesis, or
expressive properties. So, Danto maintains that an artwork has a form appropriate to its meaning.
By form, Danto is thinking of something like the human form. Thus, Danto maintains that an
artwork “fl eshes out” or gives substance to or presents or embodies its meaning or content in a form
that is appropriate or suitable or fitting. For example, a temple dedicated to Minerva, Mars, or
Hercules should employ Doric columns in recognition of their martial status.
Danto himself, for obvious reasons, abbreviates his view by proposing that artworks are embodies
meanings. He emphasizes that it is not a complete theory of art, since it provides only two
necessary conditions for art status which do not conjointly amount to sufficiency. For example,
these two conditions are not sufficient to differentiate artworks from real things; for instance, they
fail distinguish between Warhols’ Brillo Box and Proctor and Gamble’s inasmuch as both have a
form appropriate to their meaning: the former being a reflexive comment upon the nature of art
status and the latter a celebration of the Brillo pad ( Carroll, 2021).
Danto freely admits that his definition of art is incomplete. Although a work in progress, it is
arguably a fruitful starting point.
The philosophy of art history. In addition to advancing a theory of art, Danto also has a philosophy
of art history which is interestingly related to his concept of art. First proposed in his book, The
Arthur Danto
419
Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art ( 1986, 2004), Danto pronounces that art history has come to
an end, an unlikely sounding hypothesis since it would appear that nowadays more art is being
produced than ever before. However, what Danto means by “ the end of art” is not that artworks
will no longer be produced, but rather that certain kinds of art- h istorical narratives are no longer
possible – s pecifically, developmentally progressive or teleological narratives.
These are art historical narratives that chart the linear progress of art toward some preselected
goal. One such narrative, told by Vasari and Gombrich, among others, can be called “ the saga of
the conquest of visual appearances.” That is, starting in ancient Greece and then restarting again
in the Renaissance, artists putatively pursued an overarching goal, namely that of achieving verisimilitude
to the visual world. Moreover, such goal- o riented projects can come to a conclusion.
Supposedly the aspiration to conquer visual appearances came to an end with the invention of
photography and then, definitively, with cinematography which captured the very appearance of
movement.
Are other developmental, goal- driven narratives of art history possible? At least one other such
epic has been attempted. It was called Modernism which was theorized most authoritatively by
the art critic Clement Greenberg ( 1961).
According to Greenbergians, after the successful resolution of the story of the conquest of
visual appearances, artists sought another vocation. “ Modernism” was the name of that q uest –
its goal: the reflexive critique of the conditions of possibility of its own m edia – p ainting and
sculpture – by means of those very media themselves. That is, the Modernist painter would strive
to reveal and exhibit the essence of painting by means of painting.
For example, one of the conditions of painting was allegedly two- dimensionality. Thus, painters
enlisted in the project of acknowledging the flat surfaces of their works by strategies such as eschewing
perspective ( Manet), embracing abstraction ( Kandinsky, Malevich, Mondrian, etc.) and
even soaking the canvas in paint so that the paint became as one with the canvas ( Morris Lewis).
Other projects included acknowledging the shape of the support and its aesthetic relevance, as in
the work of Stella. Presumably, as time went on, artists would be able to inventory all the essential
conditions of painting, thereby delivering – by means of painting – a complete disclosure of the
nature of painting. That, at least, was the Modernist brief.
But Danto argued that narrative was no longer possible after work like Warhol’s Brill Box. Why?
Because Modernism presupposed that the nature of the art of painting could be exhibited by means
of painting. But Warhol’s work established that the nature of art was indiscernible and thus could
not possibly be revealed by painting, since painting dealt with appearances – a ppearances discernible
to the senses. As Danto put it, after Warhol’s works, among others from Duchamp to Lichtenstein,
painters would have to give up the aim of defining art and turn the job over to the philosophers.
Why? Again, because painters doing what painters do – creating appearances ( a.k.a. discernibilia)
– cannot hope, for reasons of logic, to display something indiscernible, such as the essence of
art. Consequently, the Modernist narrative has necessarily come to an end, with no other comparable
evolutionary narratives in sight, thereby convincing Danto that art has come to an end. That
is, it is not possible for art to be chronicled in terms of a progressive linear narrative.
Notably the end of the Modernist narrative is not the same as the end of the narrative of the
conquest of visual appearances. The latter narrative had a “ happy ending.” Verisimilitude was secured;
mission accomplished. On the other hand, the Modernist narrative did not achieve its goal.
It was stopped in its tracks. It just ended rather than being resolved.
Moreover, the abrupt termination of the Modernist narrative had significant repercussions for
our understanding of the art world of the closing decades of the 20th century and the opening
decades of the 21st century.
For the Modernist narrative was not merely an attempt at a descriptive account of the trajectory
of modern art. It also had a prescriptive or critical dimension. That is, it was not only supposed to
Noël Carroll
420
be a history of the way that, in fact, the trajectory of modern art tacked; it was also a map of the course that trajectory should take. Thus, Modernist critics could evaluate artists and their creations by virtue of whether or not they followed the Modernist agenda or failed to do so. Color field painters played by the Modernist rules and were appraised positively. But Surrealism – t hink of the deep perspectival space in Dali’s w ork – was beyond the pale from the Modernist viewpoint.
Consequently, when the Modernist narrative came to its untimely demise, so too did the au-thority of Modernist criticism. Artists no longer had to adhere to the Modernist critics’ marching orders since the march of ( art) history has been demobilized. Whereas under the Modernist dis-pensation all art was supposed to aim at critique, with the dissolution of the Modernist program, artists were free to explore their own agendas. Artists were not obliged to contribute to the defi-nition of art. They could pursue all sorts of self- elected aims including social criticism, museum critique, visual pleasure, you-name-it.
The defeat of the Modernist dream has critically enfranchised our present critical moment which Danto has christened as “ post- historical.” The p ost- historical moment in art history prob-ably began to take hold somewhere in the 1970s and has continued into our own time.
And despite its seventies vintage, the concept of p ost- h istorical art should not be equated with that of post- m odernist art. Danto’s characterization of the post- h istorical art world is pluralistic; post- modernist art is, on some very influential views, still governed by a program. For example, according to commentators like Hal Foster ( Foster, 1985), politicized post- modernism is good, but merely nostalgic post- modernism, like the architecture of Michael Graves, is reactionary. Whereas in contrast to Foster, for Danto, Graves, on the one hand, and Barbara Kruger and Cindy Sherman, on the other hand, are all p ost- historical as someone like Kara Walker would also be.
Danto’s notion of the end of art is very hospitable to the contemporary art scene and has been for quite some time. ( Gilmore, 2005). Nevertheless, it is not clear how philosophically, as opposed to art historically, decisive it is. For Danto claims that no more progressive developmental art his-tories are possible. However, showing that the Modernist narrative is inconclusive does not show that no other progressive story of art can be told. ( Carroll, 2021).
Art Criticism. Danto was not only a leading philosopher of art and its history. He was also a distinguished art critic, earning, among other accolades, the National Book Award for his writing ( 1990). In 1984, Danto became the art critic for The Nation and he continued in that capacity until 2009. During that time, he perfected a form of criticism perfectly suited for the Epoch of Post- Historical Art, if not for all times.
Danto’s approach to criticism is intimately related to his philosophy of art and his philosophy of art history. Recall: Danto’s philosophy of art maintains that something is an artwork only if it is intended to be ( 1) about something which is ( 2) presented or articulated in a form appropriate to whatever it is about. Although this is not sufficient as a characterization of the essential nature of art, it is eminently serviceable as a patent for art criticism. That is, in order to adequately criticize a work of art, identify whatever it is about ( its content), and show how its form ( the artist’s choices) function or serve appropriately to present, realize, or articulate whatever the work is a bout – i .e., its content.2
For example, the critic responding to Warhol’s Brillo Box identifies, as part of what the work is about, the thesis that art is a commodity and then notes that material to the way in which Warhol gets this message across, appropriately enough, is to present an artwork that is the indiscernible simulacrum of a commodity.
Or, considering a memento mori such as the statue of Prince of the World in the church of St. Sebald in Nürnberg, the critic proceeds by identifying its message by means of an interpretation – that earthly glory is transitory – and by taking note of the way this is suitably illustrated by pre-senting a frontal view of the prince in his majesty and a rear view of his cankered, decaying back.
Similarly, the n on- imposing form of Maya Lin’s m onument – Vietnam Veteran’s M emorial – reinforces its meaning, the disavowal of triumphalism ( Gilmore, 2005).
Arthur
Danto
421
Danto’s approach to criticism is also connected to his philosophy of art history. Danto’s tenure
as an art critic transpired in the period that he labeled as p ost- historical, a period in which, given
the downfall of Modernism, each artist was free to pursue his or her or their own vision. Thus,
the range of things that artworks were about was thenceforth plural, ranging from reflexive interrogations
of the audience’s phenomenological engagement with the artwork to commemorations
of Black communal life to cultural criticism of consumerism.
Furthermore, pluralism in the content of artworks, on Danto’s theory of art, mandated a plurality
for the related appropriateness of its forms of embodiment which in turn entailed, for Danto,
an accompanying pluralistic version of c riticism – o ne in which the critic isolated what each artwork,
as a singularity, was about and, in light of that, explicated the specific choices the artist had
elected in order to present that particular content appropriately. In place of the monistic evaluative
grid of Modernism, criticism à la Danto was necessarily pluralistic.
However, although Danto’s approach to criticism is especially apt in our particular p osthistorical
moment, it may be argued that insofar no progressive, art historical narrative ever truly
canvasses all of the artistic ambitions of any particular time and place, something like Danto’s
approach to criticism may not only be advisable today, but can be recommended more generally
across the board, for all seasons and climates.
Summary. Arthur Danto’s philosophy of art is remarkably unified. Its theory of art connects
with his philosophy of art history. Once the Modernist interlude collapses art could be about
anything as well as look like anything. This, in consequence, called for a pluralistic approach criticism,
one that, in accordance, with Danto’s theory of art involved locating the intended content
or meaning of the work ( a.k.a. interpreting it) as typically singular and simultaneously, in that
process, showing the ways in which the artist’s specific choices in presenting the work was/ is fitting
given the aims of the work ( i.e., what it is about).
Notes
1 In this formulation, I have added the notion of intention. I have done so in order to accommodate the
fact that some ( much) art, namely, bad art, fails to embody its content in an appropriate form. Danto
often omits mention of the role of intention in his formulations of his view, but I think that a fair reading
of Danto would concede that the intention requirement corresponds to his intention.
2 For Danto, since what the work of art is a bout – i ts c ontent – i s a meaning, the critic’s isolation of the
content of the work involves an interpretation.
References
Carroll, Noël, Arthur Danto’s Philosophy of Art: Essays ( The Hague: Brill, 2021).
Danto, Arthur, “ The Artworld,” Journal of Philosophy, vol. 61, #19(1964), pp. 571–584.
Danto, Arthur, Analytical Philosophy of History ( Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965).
Danto, Arthur, Analytical Philosophy of Knowledge ( Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968a).
Danto, Arthur, What Philosophy Is ( New York: Harper Collins, 1968b).
Danto, Arthur, Analytical Philosophy of Action ( Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973).
Danto, Arthur, Transfiguration of the Commonplace ( Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981).
Danto, Arthur, The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art ( New York: Columbia University Press, 1985, 2004).
Danto, Arthur, After the End of Art ( Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
Danto, Arthur with Sidney Morgenbesser ( eds.), Philosophy of Science: Readings ( Cleveland, OH: World Pub.
Co., 1960).
Foster, Hal, Recodings ( Port Townsend, WA: Bay Press, 1985).
Gilmore, Jonathan, “ Foreword,” in Danto, The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of the Commonplace, 2nd Edition
( New York: Columbia, 2004).
Gilmore, “ Internal Beauty,” Inquiry, vol. 48, #2(2005), pp. 145–154.
Greenberg, Clement, Art and Culture ( Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1961).
PART
VIIIInstitutional Questions

DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-50 425
41FORGERY AND AUTHENTICITY
Darren Hudson Hick
Stories of art forgery are dependably sensational and lurid, never failing to capture news head-lines. These are the crimes of the art world underworld. They are the stories of rich elites getting duped by b lue- collar rapscallions and of snooty connoisseurs revealed as the charlatans we always believed they were. Occasionally, there are Nazis involved.
There isn’t a lot of overlap in the Venn diagram of true- c rime sensationalism and art ontology. So it isn’t altogether surprising that philosophers of art have made regular forays into questions of art forgery. At least in the case of art forgery, the weed of crime bears ample philosophical fruit.
1 What Is a Forgery?
There are two main classes of art forgery. Let’s deal with these in turn, starting with what Jerrold Levinson ( 1980) calls the referential forgery— an outright copy of an existing work, presented as the original. The standout contemporary example of referential forgery is found in the case of Ely Sakhai, who in 2005 was sentenced to 41 months in prison after pleading guilty to eight counts of wire fraud. According to the Federal Bureau of Investigations, Sakhai had for several years been operating a sort of forgery mill: Sakhai would purchase minor works by familiar Impressionist, Post-Impressionist, and Modernist painters—including Chagall, Klee, and Renoir—arrange to have n ear- p erfect copies made of the originals by a small team of Chinese immigrants working above his gallery and then sell the copies as the originals, along with forged certificates of au-thenticity ( Tarmy 2015). Later, Sakhai would sell the originals, too. Indeed, it was this double- dipping that ultimately illuminated the trail back to Sakhai. In May 2000, both Sotheby’s and Christie’s auction houses featured Paul Gauguin’s Vase de Fleurs in their respective catalogues, one the original ( being sold by Sakhai himself) and the other a forgery ( presumably unbeknown to the seller, who was just the latest buyer in a chain of transactions leading to Sakhai) ( US Attorney, SDNY 2004).
The forgery case that has garnered the most philosophical attention, however, is that of 2 0th- century Dutch painter Han van Meegeren and his forgeries of Johannes Vermeer’s works. Using authentic 1 7th- c entury canvases, and paints and brushes crafted using period- a uthentic techniques, van Meegeren produced The Supper at Emmaus, mimicking the natural aging process by baking, distressing, and adding artificial patina to the finished work. The painting was not a reproduction of any true Vermeer, but captured the artist’s style well enough that it was authenticated as genu-ine by Dutch art expert Abraham Bredius and subsequently purchased by the Rembrandt Society, an esteemed group dedicated to preserving unique paintings for the Netherlands. Van Meegeren
Darren
Hudson Hick
426
followed up The Supper at Emmaus with a series of forgeries, each, in turn, authenticated and
sold as Vermeers. His downfall came when he was arrested in 1945 and charged with aiding and
abetting the enemy. He had sold one of his forgeries to a German art dealer, who subsequently
sold it to Nazi Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring. Facing the death penalty for the charge, van
Meegeren revealed that he was not plundering the Netherlands of its cultural heritage, since
Göring— like all of van Meegeren’s v ictims— had purchased a forgery. Since van Meegeren was
not laboring to reproduce any existing Vermeer, The Supper at Emmaus ( and the others to follow
it) would fall into Levinson’s second class of forgeries: the inventive forgery.
Philosophical discussion of forgery has focused primarily on works of sculpture and painting
because— i n ordinary cases, at least— a perfect copy of a literary or musical work just is a genuine
instance of that work. If I copy a Wordsworth poem word for word and then present this as a
Wordsworth poem, I am telling the truth: it just is Wordsworth’s poem. Likewise, if I perform a
prelude following a score from Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier and declare what I have performed
to be the very work that Bach created. In the case of painting and carved sculpture, however, a
perfect copy of an existing work may be a replica, or it may be a distinct work of art in its own
right, but if I present it as the authentic original, it seems it is now a forgery. So, while all art forms
may be equally subject to inventive forgery, the plastic arts seem uniquely ( or, at least, specially)
susceptible to problems of referential forgery.
In his Languages of Art, Nelson Goodman offers what has become the standard definition: “ A
forgery of a work of art is an object falsely purporting to have the history of production requisite
for the ( or an) original of the work” ( 1976: 122). And here, it helps to understand another of
Goodman’s distinctions. Paradigm literary and musical works are what Goodman calls allographic
works: on Goodman’s view, no particular history of production is required for something to be
a genuine instance of Wordsworth’s “ She Dwelt Among the Untrodden Ways” or of the first
prelude from Book I of The Well-Tempered Clavier. If it has the right symbols, or the right sounds,
in the right order, it just is what it is purported to be. This, Goodman suggests, is because a notational
system ( like words or notes) is all that determines the genuineness of allographic works.
But autographic works require more than notational adherence. In the case of a painting like Monet’s
Impression, Sunrise or a sculpture like Kapoor’s Cloud Gate, genuineness is wrapped up in the
work’s history of production: simply looking exactly like the original does not make it an instance
of the original.
For something to be ( or to be an instance of ) Impression, Sunrise, it isn’t enough that it look
like Impression, Sunrise. At the very least, Goodman might suggest, it must have i ssued— like an
autograph— f rom Monet’s own hand. Art practices complicate this somewhat; it isn’t unusual for
artists to employ assistants and fabricators in making their works. Anish Kapoor did not personally
fabricate the mirrored steel sculpture that dominates Chicago’s Millennium Park. Kapoor created
the original design for what would become Cloud Gate, but a team of engineers was brought in
to modify the design after technical concerns were raised with Kapoor’s original conception. The
massive object was actually built by Performance Structures, Inc, a fabrication company specializing
in stainless steel builds. On- s ite fabrication lasted more than a year. Cloud Gate did not issue
from Kapoor’s own hand, but what makes the thing in Millennium Park the genuine article is
that it has this rather complicated history of production. According to Goodman’s theory, to be
Cloud Gate, an object must have this history— and, as it happens, only one object qualifies: the
object presently sitting in Millennium Park and referred to by locals as “ the Bean”. A perfect copy
produced some other way would be a mere copy, and presenting that mere copy as the original
would be forgery.
Whether an item is of the allographic or autographic kind— a nd, if the latter, what is relevant to
authenticity in the item’s history of production— i s not the sort of thing that can simply be established
by examining the object itself. What makes something genuine— a genuine instance of “ She
Forgery
and Authenticity
427
Dwelt Among the Untrodden Ways,” a genuine instance of Cloud Gate—according to Goodman,
is culturally determined, arising from evolving artistic practices and technology ( Goodman 1976:
121– 1 22). Joseph Margolis similarly notes: “[A]uthenticity is a distinction of an intentional and
normative sort that is bound to reflect the shifting practices and technological possibilities of different
societies” ( Margolis 1983: 165). This is to say, things could have been different. At a first
pass, we might imagine a culture in which every copy of a poem counts as a distinct literary work
( say, if the printing press had never been invented, and so handwriting or type came to be more
aesthetically or interpretively relevant in that culture than it is in ours), or where any reproduction
of a given painting qualifies as a genuine edition of that work, despite any inaccuracies in copying
( just as we forgive occasional typos in printed novels).
Even in the real world, however, artistic practices are notoriously fluid and undefined, and
technology constantly evolving, so nailing down the authenticity conditions arising from these
is at best a complicated and uncertain process. When sculptor Auguste Rodin died in 1917, he
transferred ownership of his works, some 7,000 plaster casts, and his copyrights to the government
of France. Two years later, France opened the Musée Rodin in Paris to administer, exhibit, and
produce authentic castings of Rodin’s body of works. The French government has since decreed
that only 12 authentic “ originals” could be produced from any of Rodin’s casts. At the time of the
decrees, some of Rodin’s bronzes had not yet capped out at 12, and so the museum continued to
produce “ originals”. It produced the final, l arge- f orm Thinker in 1974. Others, like Rodin’s Eternal
Idol, were never cast during the artist’s lifetime, and the Musée Rodin authorized 12 bronzes produced
between 1927 and 1978. According to French law, any further “ aftercasts” or copies beyond
the maximum dozen must be clearly and indelibly marked “ Reproduction”. Failure to so mark the
object, or to sell that object as an authentic “ original,” would be to present the object as having
“ the history of production requisite for the ( or an) original of the work,” and so make it a forgery,
at least on Goodman’s account. The Musée Rodin leans on French copyright legislation— the
Code de la Propriété Intellectuelle— to further enforce the matter. The museum warns
Among the moral rights accorded to the artist are the right to paternity, based on which the
Musée Rodin contests the fraudulent attribution to Rodin of a work of which he is not the
author, and the right to respect of his work, based on which the Musée Rodin acts to ensure
that the artistic integrity and spirit of Rodin’s work are respected.
( Musée Rodin n.d.)
The reasoning here is that a 13th Thinker would not be an authentic “ original” and thus would be
a work “ of which [Rodin] is not the author.” And, so, to call it such violates Rodin’s moral rights,
which as a matter of law never expire.
Of course, the decreed limit on the number of authentic “ originals” is an altogether arbitrary
limitation. Except for the degradation of casts ( which could always be recreated from an authentic
original, as the cast for Eternal Idol was created from a marble original), there is no natural reason
to limit the number of authentic “ originals”. Rather, this is a cultural limitation, cemented in a
legal decision.
Goodman defines a forgery as “ an object falsely purporting to have the history of production
requisite for the (o r an) original of the work,” but, of course, objects do not purport. Rather,
objects have things purported about them. Forgeries are objects which do not have the history of
production which they are purported to have. But even this massaging of Goodman’s definition
appears to let in too much. Specifically, it labels as “ forgeries” innocent misattributions. Paintings
and sculptures are regularly misattributed by historians, art dealers, connoisseurs, and even
those institutions specifically founded to authenticate the works of particular artists. But surely
an innocent misattribution does not transform a painting or sculpture into a forgery. It is surely
Darren
Hudson Hick
428
not enough that a thing be falsely purported to have a certain history; rather, it seems, it must be deceptively purported to have that history. If there is no attempt at deception, there is no forg-ery. ( Similar issues arise in cases where collaboration, enthusiastic editing, or “ h yper- r estoration” make it unclear exactly who should be called an author of the work, or whether the original work—now heavily edited or restored—even exists anymore.)
Having teased apart the object and the act, we should ask in which the forgery is centrally located. Ely Sakhai was convicted of fraud, but there is no word of what happened to the team of Chinese immigrants who were fabricating the copies of the originals. If these artisans were un-aware of the criminal nature of the e nterprise— if they were not attempting to deceive anyone and not otherwise complicit in the d eception— w ere they forgers? Or were the products of their labors only forgeries because of Sakhai’s fraudulent representation of them? Similar concerns weigh on the cases of 19th- c entury Italian artist Giovanni Bastianini, a sculptor of Renaissance- s tyle fig-ures, who may or may not have been party to their fraudulent sale as authentic historical works ( see Moskowitz 2004) and John Myatt, who was drawn into the world of forgery by John Drewe, who commissioned a work from Myatt in the style of Braque, selling it at auction— purportedly unknown to Myatt— f or $38,000, before enticing Myatt’s active involvement in the scam ( see Landesman 1999). As Anita Moskowitz notes, “ there is an ethical imperative on the part of schol-ars to be scrupulous about assigning to a work the designation of ‘ forgery’ and to an artist the status of ‘ forger’” ( Moskowitz 2004: 167).
Consider an imaginary case ( adapted from Kivy 2002): an unscrupulous dealer obtains a paint-ing that he believes he can pass off as an early Vermeer. It matches the vague, surviving description of a lost Vermeer: “ a painting of a man washing his hands.” It looks to be about the right age, and our dealer judges it to be at least close enough to Vermeer’s early style to fool a connoisseur, if he’s lucky. An anonymous 1 7th- century Dutch painting in fair shape might bring in t ens— maybe hundreds— o f thousands of dollars, if it is striking enough. Even a mediocre, newly discovered Vermeer would be worth tens of millions. Our dealer is lucky and finds an authenticator who is willing to call the painting a Vermeer, and he rakes in millions at auction. Now, as it happens, the painting that the dealer was trying to pass off as a Vermeer really is a Vermeer. Call this the “ erroneously- misattributed Vermeer.” The question, then, is whether the erroneously misat-tributed Vermeer is also a forgery, in virtue of the dealer’s attempts to misleadingly represent the painting as a Vermeer. If our intuition is that it is a forgery, then this seems to locate the forgery in the attempted deception— in the beliefs and intentions of the dealer. This dislocates forgery from the object itself. If, on the other hand, our intuition is that the painting is not a forgery because it is authentic, then this locates forgery centrally ( or, at least, significantly) in the object itself. Our intuitions, I think, pull in both directions.
2 Forgery and Authenticity
An object’s authenticity is treated by many philosophers ( and non- philosophers) as an aesthetic quality— o r, at least, a quality relevant to aesthetic value. Goodman suggests that faced with two apparently indistinguishable w orks— one the original and the other a referential f orgery— knowledge that the one on the left is a fake and the one on the right is authentic makes an aesthetic difference for me, even if I can’t see any difference. His suggestion is that knowing that one thing is a forgery, and another the original, could lead me to lean in, to look more closely, and to discover those fine but important differences. So my future experiences of these works may well be altered. “ Thus,” suggests Goodman, “ not only later but right now, the unperceived difference between the two pictures is a consideration pertinent to my visual experience with them” ( Goodman 1976: 105). Although I may not be able to see the difference now, knowing what I know promises to reveal differences, and that makes an aesthetic difference here and now.
Forgery
and Authenticity
429
Where Goodman’s claim rests on a promise to the viewer of future visual— a nd thus aesthetic—
discrimination, others have argued that the knowledge itself should be sufficient to produce an
aesthetic difference even if the two w orks— t he forgery and the o riginal— s hall forever remain
visually indiscernible. Mark Sagoff ( 1976; 1978a; 1978b; 1985) argues that to assess ( say) a forged
Chagall as a Chagall is to assess it against the wrong reference class. A thing is never merely beautiful,
Sagoff argues, but rather beautiful for a rose, or for a sunset, or for a Chagall, or for an early
Modernist work. When I appreciate a Chagall, I appreciate it against the background of Chagall’s
other works, and in its place in the development of Western art. To assess a Sakhai forgery as a
Chagall is to make an error about its aesthetic q ualities— to misassess it. Learning that the thing I
am looking at is a forgery should force me to change the reference class against which I compare
it, producing a very different aesthetic assessment ( even if that reassessment produces a higher
assessment of the forgery than of the original).
In the case of a referential forgery like Sakhai’s, the effects of such misassessment may be minimal
and contained. In the case of successful inventive forgeries like van Meegeren’s Vermeers,
the effects are systemic. The Supper at Emmaus mimicked Vermeer’s style well enough that experts
were fooled, but the series of forgeries that followed it declined drastically in quality. The paintings
at the end of the series are comically bad, far from resembling genuine Vermeers. Still, the last
resembles the next-to-last, which resembles the next-to-next-to-last, and so on up to the first. As
the first is accepted as genuine, so too was more easily the next, and the next after that. Vermeer’s
surviving body of works is famously small, consisting in only some 37 known paintings ( and a
handful of these are debatable attributions). These, then, constitute the reference class against
which The Supper at Emmaus would have been assessed when it was authenticated as a Vermeer in
1936. And, with it accepted as genuine, the next forgery in the series would have been assessed
against a reference class including the known, genuine Vermeers and The Supper at Emmaus. And
so on for the next eight in the series. But, with the series of forgeries accepted as authentic, each of
the genuine Vermeers is also being misassessed against the wrong reference class: one substantially
composed of forgeries.
Some philosophers suggest that knowledge that the thing before us is authentic or inauthentic
does not merely give rise to a new aesthetic a ssessment— it produces a felt phenomenal quality of
its own. Carolyn Korsmeyer suggests that a replica simply “ does not inspire the same admiring
attention as a real thing, even when it is perceptually indiscernible from an original; and this
phenomenon suggests the aesthetic dimension of genuineness” ( Korsmeyer 2016: 220). Walter
Benjamin famously calls this the object’s “ aura”— a quality experienced in the original but not in
its replicas ( Benjamin 1968). And experience of aura— of a thing’s genuineness— feels like something.
If our belief about the object before us shifts from the belief that it is a mere replica to belief
that it is the real thing— or vice v ersa— we should expect a shift in our ensuing experience of that
thing. As Korsmeyer puts it, “ When error is discovered, affective responses change” ( Korsmeyer
2012: 376). We seek out o riginals— a nd are less satisfied with r eproductions— p recisely because
we value the experience of genuineness. David Davies ( 2006) argues that this shift in experience
between replica and original follows from a shift in how we value authenticity—that our valuation
of genuineness informs our experiences.
Sherri Irvin suggests a critical difference between our understanding of the artist’s project and
that of the forger— a difference that helps to explain the differences in our experiences of their
respective creations. The artist chooses her objectives and makes decisions about how best to accomplish
those goals, perhaps changing objectives several times as she goes. The artist— i nsofar as
she is an a rtist— is, in this sense, free ( Irvin 2005: 133– 134). When we engage with, interpret, and
appreciate a work of art, we typically consider the artist’s project, her chosen objectives, and her
choices in pursuit of those objectives. Part of what it means to appreciate the work is to appreciate
it as the product of such choices. A forger, insofar as he is a forger, however, cannot but pursue the
Darren
Hudson Hick
430
overriding objective of creating a thing that will pass as the work of another. This goal will dictate the subject matter, the style, the materials used, and the methods employed in creating that object. It will dictate everything about the object. When we knowingly engage with a forgery, we abandon questions about the creator’s artistic p roject— he d oesn’t have one. We do not ask why the forger chose to pose a figure the way that he did, or why he chose to carve in this wood rather than that wood. The answer to all such questions will be the same: because he believed it would help the creation pass as the work of another.
When van Meegeren’s ruse was uncovered, the veil lifted and art experts began to wonder aloud how they were ever fooled by these monstrosities. The Supper at Emmaus, once hailed by Abraham Bredius as Vermeer’s masterpiece ( Elam 1990), seemed to immediately display its many flaws. We do not merely disvalue i t— we approach it altogether differently. Today, van Meegeren’s paintings attract curious attention of their own, though now in their capacity as forgeries. Amster-dam’s Rijksmuseum, which purchased van Meegeren’s The Washing of the Feetin 1936—believing it a genuine Vermeer— n ow displays the painting under van Meegeren’s name, along with other works by the forger, evidence from his trial, and ( acquired in 2014) his plaster death mask. This seems appropriate. The draw to knowingly view such forgeries is an allure akin to that of the cir-cus sideshow and w ax- m useum exhibits of notorious bandits and murderers. To study The Washing of the Feet as a genuine Vermeer is to study it as a work of art. To study the same painting as a van Meegeren is to study it as a forgery, as a grotesquerie: a true- c rime artifact. Certainly, we should expect these experiences to differ.
Now recall the case of the erroneously misattributed Vermeer from last section, deceptively sold as the Vermeer which ( as it happens) it was. The work would not, upon the uncovering of our unscrupulous dealer’s ruse, be studied as a forgery. It would be studied— a s it would before the dealer’s ruse was discovered— as a Vermeer, our experience of it essentially unchanged, its au-thenticity and artistic value intact. Certainly, we might ( as with van Meegeren’s forgeries) be cu-rious about the painting’s role in such an odd criminal enterprise, and this alone might entice the public to see it. As the Rijksmuseum has noticed, humanity has a healthy appetite for true crime stories. The Mona Lisa didn’t begin drawing crowds until its 1911 theft from the Louvre. Indeed, its conspicuous absence wasn’t noticed for some 28 hours. Then, suddenly, its image dominated newspapers around the globe. When the Mona Lisa was eventually recovered two years later, throngs of the curious came to see it. But, today, the theft is a footnote in the painting’s history, and da Vinci’s masterpiece is centrally appreciated as an artwork. We could expect the same of the erroneously misattributed Vermeer, at least after the morbid c uriosity- s eekers move on. In this way, the erroneously misattributed Vermeer is like any innocent misattribution: once we uncover the truth, we don’t call it a forgery, and we don’t experience it as one. The attempted deception did not transform the Vermeer into a forgery, only to have it transformed back upon discovery of the r use— it never was a forgery. However, in both the case of the erroneously misattributed Vermeer and the case of the innocent misattribution, we find some of the same wrongs that we find in true cases of forgery.
3 The Wrongs of Forgery
Philosophers have pointed at a number of wrongs to be found in forgery, which we can divide into three rough categories:
3.1 Failures of Integrity
Where there is no deception, there is no forgery. Certainly, van Meegeren evidences a moral failure of integrity in his deception, on its own a deontological sin that he shares with the dealer
Forgery
and Authenticity
431
in the case of the erroneously misattributed Vermeer: he lied ( or, in the latter case, attempted to
lie) about the work. In this, forgery differs from a case of innocent misattribution, which lacks
deceptive intent. But, Alfred Lessing argues, there is a further failure of integrity in the case of The
Supper at Emmaus— i n the work itself. Forgeries, he contends, pretend to be original achievements
at some place in the history of art. The realm of art does not exist as an array of disconnected objects,
each independent of the others. Rather, an artwork is only an artwork because of the place it
takes in art history. Lessing argues that a work of art carries its aesthetic value on its surface; rather
than making a critical a bout- face upon learning that The Supper at Emmaus was a forgery, “ critics
should have [had] the courage of their convictions” and stood by their aesthetic assessments of it
( Lessing 1965: 463). However, while a van Meegeren forgery may be as beautiful as a Vermeer or
a Sakhai forgery as beautiful as a Gauguin original, Lessing argues, “ it presents nothing new or
creative to the history of art,” though it pretends to ( Lessing 1965: 468; see also Bowden 1999).
While this is neither an aesthetic wrong, Lessing suggests, nor on its own strictly a moral wrong,
it is nevertheless an artistic failing of integrity.
3.2 Harms
An array of harms have been associated with art forgeries. Certainly, most forgers engage in forgery
primarily for monetary purposes. ( Many, like van Meegeren, deny this. But, of course, forgers
are liars.) As Hubertus Butin puts it, “ whatever is coveted will be forged” ( Butin 2013: 46). And
so, those relieved of their money by the forger’s deceit will predictably experience some harm
arising from the ruse. However, as we have seen, the harms identified by philosophers tend to run
deeper. Where Alfred Lessing considers the forgery’s pretense to a history it does not have a failure
of artistic integrity, but not an aesthetic failure, Denis Dutton ( 1983) argues that in misrepresenting
its creator’s achievement, the forgery causes us to aesthetically misassess the work. An artwork
is a thing that has been done— t he culmination of a performance, an action; a work of art, insofar
as it is a work of art, cannot be so easily divorced from its origins. If Korsmeyer and Davies are
on the right track, then authenticity is itself part of a work’s aesthetic character— o r, in the case of
the forgery, absent from it. Insofar as failing to properly appreciate a work, or gaining false beliefs
about a work, qualifies as a harm, forgery produces this harm also. If the audience for the forgery
is more than one individual, that harm is multiplied.
Harm is further compounded in cases of inventive forgeries: when some previously unknown
work by “ Vermeer” is uncovered— however minor— it will produce new ripples in our understanding
of art history, just as the Piltdown man ( for decades believed to represent a missing link
between man and ape, but revealed to be a hoax) produced ripples in science. In at least one case,
the acceptance of a forgery as the genuine article has led to the rejection of an authentic work as
a fake. A forged 14th- century carved head in the collection of the Louvre came to be treated as
the “ stylistic yardstick” of a period of ancient Egyptian sculpture, leading to the rejection of another
sculpture “ because certain of its stylistic features were at variance with those of the Louvre
piece” ( Bianchi 2000: 13). Conversely, a number of works have been erroneously pulled from the
oeuvres of artists’ works on the suspicion that they were forgeries, suspicions later overturned. The
looming possibility of forgery— e ven where there are no f orgeries— i s damaging to our understanding
of art history. It is impossible to know just how much we misunderstand about art history
because we cannot know how many of the works in museums and private collections, accepted
and studied as genuine, are fakes. Of course, these are not harms peculiar to forgery. Indeed, precisely
the same harms are risked with innocent misattributions.
Not all forgeries will have the broad, reverberating ill effects on art history. As Sherri Irvin
points out, some of them sit on private living room walls, little interfering with understanding
of art history outside those rooms ( Irvin 2007: 302). In general, the harms generated by forgery
Darren Hudson Hick
432
appear to be wildly contingent. Contrary to the views of Sagoff and Korsmeyer, it’s difficult to imagine the viewer, imbued with the knowledge that the object before her is the illicit 13th casting of the Thinker, and not the authorized 12th, now making any change to her assessment of the object. It is also difficult to think that accepting a 13th Thinker as genuine would have any measurably ill effects on our understanding of art history. Such a lack of difference, David Davies contends, is reason to resist such an arbitrary line between the authentic and the inauthentic ( Davies 2015: 89). But the harms of forgery are surely not analytic of its nature as a forgery: one forgery can be less harmful than a nother— indeed, could presumably be entirely benign— without negating its status as a forgery. Certainly, once a forgery is exposed, its harms are largely negated, but still, it remains a forgery. That being said, the specifics of the Rodin case do point us at one final sort of wrong in forgery.
3.3 Violations of Rights or Duties
The Rodin case points us to the wrong of forgery probably most overlooked by philosophers.
Forgery is, in an important sense, the inverse of plagiarism. The plagiarist hopes to be attributed responsibility ( appreciation, acclaim) for something he did not create, where the forger looks to defer responsibility for something that he did. The plagiarist steals credit; the forger plants it.
The moral right to paternity which the Musée Rodin invokes on Rodin’s behalf is treated as a perpetual right on Rodin’s part to not be held responsible for things he did not do. That is, to say that a person is a work’s c reator— or, more generally, author— is to hold that person responsible for making the work, and for what is in the work, whether for good or for bad. The suggestion, then, is that such a right extends beyond the author’s death. This is at least a contentious issue in philosophy. If it is correct that the dead— being dead— are immune to harm, then the notion that the rights of the dead might be violated seems either a non- s tarter, or else depends on some notion of harm that is backwardly causative ( harming the author in the past from the future), somehow untethered to time, or otherwise baffling ( see Feinberg 1984: 79– 95; Pitcher 1984; Taylor 2005). Another option is to suggest that it is not Rodin himself who is at risk of being harmed, but rather his reputation: Rodin may be dead, but his reputation is ( if only in a metaphorical sense) a living thing. Certainly, reputations can be damaged. However, we seem unlikely to find safe refuge from the mystery that threatens backward causation in the idea that reputations are rights- b earing things.
The particulars of forgery suggest another possibility. I can tell all manner of lies about you: about your age, about your beliefs, about your “ real” hair color. But there is something more happening when I lie about your having made an artwork you did not make. In this case, I am knowingly attempting to get others to heap responsibility on you for things you did not do. I have, presumably, the duty not to knowingly hold you responsible for things you did not do, and by extension, not to knowingly work to get others to hold you so responsible. To say that I hold you responsible now for the act you performed yesterday is to say that yesterday- y ou was right or wrong to perform the act. Strictly speaking, it is yesterday- y ou that I am blaming or praising. I just assume that today- you is still relevantly the same person as yesterday- you, and so a suitable carrier of that responsibility. Y esterday- y ou may well be immune to today- harm ( so my duty here does not arise from y esterday- you’s interest in not being harmed) but is not immune to t oday- blame. Independent of any harm, it would be wrong to hold t oday- y ou responsible for an act that I know-ingly, incorrectly attribute to yesterday- you precisely because it would be wrong, today, to hold yesterday- you responsible for that act. And, by extension, it would be wrong, today, to knowingly work to get others to hold y esterday- y ou responsible for things that y esterday- y ou did not do. If all of this holds true, then at least part of the wrong of forgery lies in the forger’s working to get others to hold an artist or author responsible for something she did not do— i.e. make the work
Forgery and Authenticity
433
that the forger is attributing to her. The fact that the knowingly misattributed author is deceased
makes no difference to this wrongness- aspect of the act.
Unlike the harms of forgery, this is not wildly contingent: insofar as a work is a forgery, someone
is being attributed responsibility for something they did not do. Vermeer may have been long
dead when van Meegeren created his forgeries, but it still seems an egregious wrong to impose
responsibility for such grotesque creations on Vermeer. Of course, not every subject of forgery
is dead ( forged prints falsely attributed to living artists, including Gerhard Richter and Damien
Hirst, are not uncommon; see Butin 2013)— a nd it would be as wrong and for the same reason to
knowingly misattribute responsibility to a living a uthor— but an artist’s being dead tends to make
the ruse easier to pull off.
The wrongs of forgery are several and not reducible to any single misgiving. Forgeries are, by
several accounts, artistically hollow things, given a place on the museum wall that they do not
deserve. But, of course, this is true of any number of non- forgeries as well. Harms may or may
not arise from forgeries, and where they do, such harms may be substantial or they may be minimal,
depending on the particulars of the case. So far as it goes, however, the harms resulting from
forgery are of a kind with those resulting from misattributions and over- r estorations, and do not
distinguish forgery from true art. What remains a necessary condition of forgery is the deception:
insofar as some painting, sculpture, or other such product is a forgery, someone is being lied to and
someone is being lied about. And, unlike other cases of fraudulence, a forgery remains a forgery
after the deception is uncovered. The Supper at Emmaus was purchased in 2011 by Rotterdam’s
Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen. The Museum describes the painting:
Van Meegeren’s technique remains exceptional. For his masterpiece ‘ The Supper at Emmaus’,
Van Meegeren used a genuine 17th- century canvas and historical pigments. He bound the
pigments with bakelite, which hardened when heated to produce a surface very similar to
that of a 1 7th- c entury painting. This technique, combined with Van Meegeren’s choice of
subject matter and composition, was an important factor in convincing so many people of the
authenticity of his works.
( Museum Boijmans van Beuningen n.d.)
For all the neutral language in the statement, and despite its correct attribution to van Meegeren,
The Supper at Emmaus remains a forgery, a stain that can never be painted over.
References
Benjamin, W. ( 1968) “ The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,” in W. Benjamin ( Ed.),
Illuminations, trans. Harry Zohn, New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, p p. 2 11– 244.
Bianchi, R.S. ( 2000) “ On the Nature of Forgeries of Ancient Egyptian Works of Art from the Amarna
Period,” Source: Notes in the History of Art, 20(1), 10–17.
Bowden, R. ( 1999) “ What Is Wrong with an Art Forgery?: An Anthropological Perspective,” Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism, 57(3), 333–343.
Butin, H. ( 2013) “ Whatever Is Coveted Will be Forged – Forgers Set Their Sights on Contemporary Prints,”
Print Quarterly, 30(1), 44–53.
Davies, D. ( 2006) “ Against Enlightened Empiricism,” in M. Kieran ( Ed.), Contemporary Debates in Aesthetics
and the Philosophy of Art, Marlden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 22–34.
Davies, D. ( 2015) “ Varying Impressions,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 73(1), 81–92.
Dutton, D. ( 1983) “ Artistic Crimes,” in D. Dutton ( Ed.), The Forger’s Art: Forgery and the Philosophy of Art,
Berkeley: University of California Press, p p. 1 72– 187.
Elam, C. ( 1990) “ The Truth About Fakes,” Burlington Magazine, 1050(September), 615–631.
Feinberg, J. ( 1984) The Moral Limits of the Criminal Law: Volume 1, Harm to Others, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Darren
Hudson Hick
434
Goodman, N. ( 1976) Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols, 2nd edition, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Irvin, S. ( 2005) “ Appropriation and Authorship in Contemporary Art,” British Journal of Aesthetics, 45(2), 123–137.
Irvin, S. ( 2007) “ Forgery and the Corruption of Aesthetic Understanding,” Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 37(2),283–304.
Kivy, P. ( 2002) “ Intentional Forgeries and Accidental Versions: A Response to John Dilworth,” British Jour-nal of Aesthetics,42(4),419–422.
Korsmeyer, C. ( 2012) “ Touch and the Experience of the Genuine,” British Journal of Aesthetics52(4),365–377.
Korsmeyer, C. ( 2016) “ Real Old Things,” British Journal of Aesthetics,56(3),219–231.
Landesman, P. ( 1999) “ A 20th- Century Master Scam,” New York Times Magazine ( July 18), 35
Lessing, A. ( 1965) “ What Is Wrong with a Forgery?” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,23(4),461–471.
Levinson, J. ( 1980) “ Autographic and Allographic Art Revisited,” Philosophical Studies, 38(4), 367–383.
Margolis, J. ( 1983) “ Art, Forgery, and Authenticity,” in D. Dutton ( Ed.), The Forger’s Art: Forgery and the Philosophy of Art, Berkeley: University of California Press, p p. 1 53– 171.
Moskowitz, A.F. ( 2004) “ The Case of Giovanni Bastianini: A Fair and Balanced View,” Artibus et Historiae, 25(50),157–185.
Musée Rodin ( n.d.) Respecting Rodin’s Moral Right: A Warning to Collectors About the Notion of Authenticity, availableat:http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/musee-rodin/respecting-moral-right(accessedSeptember17, 2019).
Museum Boijmans van Beuningen ( n.d.) The Fake Vermeers of Van Meegeren, available at: https:// www. boijmans.nl/en/exhibitions/the-fake-vermeers-of-van-meegeren (accessed September 23, 2019).
Pitcher, G. ( 1984) “ The Misfortunes of the Dead,” American Philosophical Quarterly,21(2),183–188.
Sagoff, M. ( 1976) “ The Aesthetic Status of Forgeries,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 35(2), 169–180.
Sagoff, M. ( 1978a) “ Historical Authenticity,” Erkenntnis, 12(1), 83–93.
Sagoff, M. ( 1978b) “ On Restoring and Reproducing Art,” Journal of Philosophy,75(9),53–70.
Sagoff, M. ( 1985) “ He Had a Hat,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,44(2),191–192.
Tarmy, J. ( 2015) “ Here’s how to Make Millions as an Art Forger,” Bloomberg, available at: https:// www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-05-21/here-s-how-to-make-millions-as-an-art-forger(accessedSeptember 17, 2019).
Taylor, J.S. ( 2005) “ The Myth of Posthumous Harm,” American Philosophical Quarterly, 4(4), 211–322.
US Attorney, SDNY ( 2004) “ U.S. Charges NYC Gallery Owner in M ultimillion- Dollar Global Scheme to Sell Real Masterworks and Forged Copies,” Justice.gov, available at https:// web.archive.org/ web/ 20140313093621/http://www.justice.gov/usao/nys/pressreleases/March04/sakhaicomplaintpr.pdf
DOI:
10.4324/9781003312727-51 435
42MUSEUM AS MIRRORThe Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
Curtis L. Carter
For the most part philosophers, with notable exceptions such as John Dewey, Hilda Hein, Nelson Goodman, and Arthur Danto, have until recently given slight attention to museum as a subject for philosophy. This seeming neglect of philosophers, especially the philosophers working in the domain of aesthetics, is in a sense surprising as museums appear predominantly in the art cultures of the world and have been among the key means of documenting and sharing of the different art cultures.1
The approach to understanding the philosophy of museums offered here is based in part on research into museum history and philosophy and contemporary literature relating to the phi-losophy of museums and their place in earlier and contemporary cultures. This investigation has taken place while exploring with culturally diverse students in aesthetics the role of museum cul-tures in Washington D C, New York, and various cities in China. My experiences as a founding museum director with direct exposures to museums across the world have contributed further to understanding of philosophy’s role in understanding the nature and functions of museums. Hence, the focus here will not be on the question of the operating philosophy of a particular museum such as the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles or the Centre Pompidou in Paris with a certain operating approach to museum philosophy.2 Rather, the intent is to explore museum philosophy aiming at a philosopher’s understanding of the concept of the art museum in the context of other studies of the museum from the perspectives of museology and art history. Museology refers to the practice of the organization and management of museums and their roles in society. Art history, though evolving from a discipline which concentrates on artists and works of art, to a discipline focused more on contextualizing art works in other social and conceptual contexts, even phil-osophical contexts, for analysis and interpretation, maintains a relation to the art museum. ( S ee Chinese art historian Wu Hung’s essay, “ Art History and the Museum.”)3
The aim here is to capture some aspects of museum origins and evolution that provide a con-text for understanding philosophy’s relation to museum origins and evolution as well as the muse-um’s roles in contemporary culture. Understanding some of the historic and contemporary issues concerning the development of museums will further benefit the development of on- going phil-osophical discourse pertaining to museums. Important contemporary cultural changes resulting from new technologies and major shifts in social issues relating to gender, race, and education will offer new challenges to our understanding of the museum. The approach to museum philosophy here will benefit from and perhaps on occasion trespass upon developments in cultural history in-cluding art history as well as museology ( the practices pertaining to organizing and management
Curtis
L. Carter
436
of museums). Also of interest to museum philosophy are the contributions of artists who critique
museum practices through their exhibitions and other engagements in the museum.
1 Cultural Heritage of the Museum
To comprehend the current state of museum as a topic for philosophy, it is useful to begin our approach
with a brief look at the museum’s cultural heritage and development in concept and practice
over time. An understanding of this aspect of museums is useful to viewing its present state
and the philosophical issues that are of concern in reference to today’s museum. In the absence of
any extensively developed historic philosophies of the museum, it is necessary to mainly abstract
the philosophy of the museum from its historic practices into the 20th century.
The term museum has its origins in the Greek word “ museion” which referred to a sanctuary
dedicated to the muses of Greek mythology. The Greek author Pausianius reports that a building
adjacent to the Propylaea on the Acropolis at Athens contained a hall called Pinakotheke where a
collection of paintings could be viewed by the public. This gallery was in fact one small part of a
grand scheme of public art envisioned by Pericles in the Athenian democracy of 5th century B.C.
in Greece. Pericles selected Phidias, a prominent sculptor, to create a system of temples, monuments,
theaters, and other public buildings to reflect the artistic accomplishments of Athenian
citizens. We do not have details on access to this early museum on the grounds of the Parthenon.
However, given the democratic aims of the Greeks during this period, it is reasonable to assume
that the space would be accessible to citizens of Athens and visitors.
What then is a museum? First, in the simplest terms, a museum consists of a space dedicated to
the presentation and care of art, often of a particular architectural distinction, and its collections
of art or other cultural artifacts. Today’s museums include a staff of professionals trained in the
care and presentation of works of art, and a governing system such as a board of directors who
are responsible for polices and funding.4 Collecting and curating art are the two essential tasks
undertaken by art museums since their beginnings. Collecting art has its beginnings when private
individuals or institutions acquire art and display their art in private spaces. Collecting is carried
forward in the royal courts of Europe and other government agencies responsible for national and
local cultural treasures. Curating refers to the tasks concerned with the care and presentation of
art for the museum viewer’s understanding.
Origins of the Vatican Museum in Rome, which remains one of the finest museum collections
of art, began in the 16th century began when Pope Julius II established a collection of classical
sculpture. Between 1709 and 1714, Elector Jonathan Wilhelm built a separate gallery for his art
collection adjacent to his house in Dusseldorf, and engaged a painter, Lambert Krahte, to reorganize
and install the collections. In his approach to curating, the major pictures were installed
according to an aesthetic program, while the lesser pictures were relegated to a decorative role
in the palace. “ Krahe adhered to a hierarchic program of curating in which the best works were
placed at eye level on the lower register; larger and more decorative pictures were placed high up
on the wall.”5 A colleague, Nicholas de Pigage, in Rome introduced the catalogue as an important
aid to curating. De Pigage saw the catalogue as a means of reaching new art publics. The practice
of creating art catalogues based on museum collections and exhibitions is continued today,
although with attention to education and broader outreach. These innovations effective lay down
key elements in the museum that continue today.
Grand Duke Leopoldo opened the Uffizi Gallery as a museum in Florence with access to the
public in 1769. This gesture was in part a response to the physiocrats, who believed that it was the
responsibility of the state to educate its people, and make use of the arts to promote the healthy development
of society. Leopoldo’s plan was to make the Uffizi in Florence a public facility intended
to function as a part of the education system. Initially, however, the gallery was opened only to a
Museum as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
437
limited public which included the traditional categories of the nobility and foreign visitors as well
as artists and students of art.
In France, the Luxembourg Gallery, which functioned from 1750 to 1779, and the Louvre,
which opened in 1793, were the main sources of art collections, followed by regional museums
throughout France. The ideas of French art theorists, André Félibien and Roger de Piles, were
influential in shaping curatorial practices in the Luxembourg Gallery, whose mission included “ -
the training of aspiring artists and amateurs in the detection of quality in art.” As de Piles wrote in
1677, “ True knowledge of painting consists in knowing if a picture is good or bad; in being able
to distinguish what is well done in a work from what is not, and then to explain the judgment one
makes.”6 Quality in this instance is estimated in terms of the artist’s performance with respect to
drawing, color, composition, and expression.7 The establishment of quality in art as the aim of the
museum experience presupposes already an audience, defined by the theorist Petit de Bauchamont
in his book Essay on Painting of 1751, as “ men of good sense ….and of good faith….” possessed of
“ s ensibility and quality of mind.”8 A certain level of social and verbal understanding as well as
visual literacy were presumed of the intended audience. Pictures contained in the Luxembourg
Gallery were drawn from the royal collections, and consisted of a mix of Italian, Northern European,
and a single gallery of French masters. The pictures were not arranged into schools, and no
labels were provided. Rather, the gallery was arranged to encourage comparative viewing of the
paintings with respect to assessing the quality of drawing, color, composition, and expression.9
A notable change for the museum centered on the establishment of the Louvre in Paris in 1793.
Initially planned as a part of Louis XVI grand cultural scheme and orchestrated by his minister
of culture Comte d’Angiviller, the Louvre was conceived with three main objectives in mind: to
reestablish state control of the arts, to show the artistic supremacy of France in the international
community, and also to commission artists to create art that would educate the public. The art
planned for the Louvre drew upon French history and contemporary affairs and was intended
to influence public support in favor of the monarchy. With respect to curatorial practices, a new
system of classification based on national and regional schools, arranged chronologically was introduced.
For instance, a master such as Rembrandt would be placed in the context of his fellow
artists of the Dutch school.
The French Revolution produced radical changes in all aspects of French culture, including the
museums. After the collapse of the monarchy, the revolutionaries established the first national public
art museum, giving all persons irrespective of rank or profession access to the art treasures previously
reserved for the privileged audiences. The words of the painter, Jacques-Louis David (1748–
1825), at a festival in conjunction with the liberation of the museum captures the spirit of the day:
All individuals useful to society will be joined together as one; you will see the president of the
executive committee in step with the blacksmith; the mayor with his sash in color beside the
butcher or mason; the Black African, who differs only in color, next to the white European.10
The ramifications of this revolutionary concept of the museum were substantial. People came to
the museum lacking the basic education in matters of taste and education that had been previously
assumed. And yet they came to see the art with a new sense of ownership, as the works there now
belonged to them. Still the presence of visitors lacking the conventions for viewing art posed new
challenges for the keepers of collection, here to fore unaccustomed to having to address the needs
of such visitors.
The new situation posed a dilemma for the leaders of the Republic. The new museum must
address the question of visual education for its new audiences, as well as satisfy those who were
accustomed to the intellectual demands and learning opportunities provided by the museum’s
collections. The immediate task for the museum in this new social context, as Pierre Bourdieu
Curtis
L. Carter
438
might argue, was to equip the viewers with the necessary perceptual skills and artistic knowledge
to appreciate and benefit from the experience of visiting the museum.11
Perhaps the most radical challenges for the museum at the beginning of the 20th century
emerged in post-
revolutionary Russia after the Bosheviks trashed the imperial collections in the
Winter Palace. The debate centered on who should be in charge of the museums, and what should
be shown. It was determined by the Executive Board of the Visual Arts Section of the Russian
state that artists should be in charge of the museum, and that the museum would be dedicated to
an exposition of artistic culture as determined by the avant- garde
artists of their times. The first curatorial program for the new museum, developed under the leadership of the artist- theorist Vasily
Kandinsky ( 1886– 1944), proposed that the museum be organized on the principles of formalist
or non- objective experiments by artists. Art was allowed from all periods, but the plan rejected
chronology and great masterpieces.
In contrast to Kandinsky’s plan, the artists Kazamir Malevich ( 1879– 1935) and Alexander Rodchenko ( 1891– 1956) proposed that the museum become a laboratory for living artists focusing
exclusively on the future. The Constructivists further defined the exhibition space as a laboratory
archive, where it was possible to see art transformed into labor in the process of solving problems
of construction. Here, the emphasis is on the artists and their needs for a laboratory for showing
invention, experimentation, and production, replacing the viewer’s interests in contemplating
representational or expressive images concerned with art’s relation to the world outside of art.
These early 20th- century reform efforts initially found favor with the state, but soon were deemed
too narrowly professional and lacking in ideological and historical content. Thus, the Soviet
Union in its emerging stages redefined the art museum according to an agenda based on Socialist
Realism aimed at maximizing the continuity of art and life.12
In the United States, wealthy private collectors such as J. P. Morgan, Andrew Carnegie, and
later the Rockefeller, the Guggenheim, and the Whitney families claimed a significant role in the
development of art collections and museums in New York and other American cities. The early 20th- century artists produced changes in artist’s practices resulting in various strands of modern
art. In 1921, Duncan Philips, the son of a Pittsburgh industrialist, established the Phillips Memorial Gallery ( now the Phillips Collection in Washington, D C), as the first modern art museum
in the United States. The opening of the Museum of Modern Art in New York followed in 1929.
Both of these museums reflect the influences of changes in art practices by modern artists and the
changing American industrial culture.
Phillips was mainly interested in providing a museum setting where the works of modern artists Degas, Matisse, Van Gogh, Renoir, and Picasso could stand in dialogue with earlier masters
( El Greco, Goya, Chardin). Alfred Barr, the first director of the Museum of Modern Art in New
York, charted a different philosophy for the art museum: “ Museums should be platforms of the
still controversial figures…as well as artist of classic reputation.” He emphasized the necessity for
museums that are open- minded and unafraid of the advanced developments in art and culture.
The previous overview of concepts and practices guiding the development of the museum
paves the way for emerging interest of philosophers in contributing to our understanding of the
museum. Each of these contributions to modern and contemporary museum studies help to set the
stage for philosophers to bring the museum into their domain of critical conceptual examination
and value assessments.
2 Multidisciplinary Contributions to Museum Philosophy
At present there are two main sources of writings contributory to the philosophy of museums.
One source consists of works authored by multidisciplinary writers engaged in, or addressing
actual practices of the museum while addressing on issues relating to the development of museum
Museum as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
439
philosophy. Contributors to the development of museum philosophy in this category include
authors such as Tony Bennett, The Birth of the Museum ( 1995), Stephen E. Weil, Making Museums
Matter ( 2002), Hugh H. Genoway, and Mary Anne Andrei’s edited collection: Museum Origins
( 2008) and Margaret Tali’s Absence and Difficult Knowledge in Contemporary Art Museums (2018).
For this group, the philosophical issues generated by museums emerge out of the historic and
changing contemporary societal realities in which the museum itself has evolved with changing
societal roles. Bennett, with references to Michel Foucault, examines the political demands on the
museum and related issues. He argues for example that the museum should offer “ p arity of representation
for all groups and cultures,” i.e., theoretical and practical access with respect to collecting,
exhibition, and to all activities of the museum.13 Weil emphasizes the social usefulness of the
museum and its accountability in a democratic society by its manifesting respect for the public and
concern for its needs.14 Among the topics that inform museum philosophy in the pages of Genoway
and Andrei’s assembled essays are these: purposes and aims of museums, the art museum and
the public, museum ethics, the place of museums in education, and museums and universities.15
The concept of “ absence,” as Tali relates it to museum philosophy in Absence and Difficult
Knowledge in Contemporary Art Museums ( 2018), pertains to the roles that information stored in museum
archives perform with respect to concealing “ difficult knowledge.”16 In addition to exhibitions
of art and information made public pertaining to works on display through labels, texts, and
museum catalogues, museum archives serve an important function in the preservation of museum
knowledge. Museum archives contain information on such issues as acquisition processes, donations
of private collectors, and works acquired thru public funding. Museum archives also reveal
such socially pertinent information as the ratio of women artists to men in the collection, the ratio
of works exhibited versus the scope of the collection, the condition of art works in the collection,
a record of deaccessioning of art from the museum collection, and information concerning art that
may relate to societal controversies that relate to the museum.
Among the questions posed by Tali is the philosophical grounding for how museums manage
( e xhibit and archive) difficult knowledge with respect to community power dynamics and community
memories. For example, Joseph Beuys’ installation art work, Tramstop, with references to
the German Nazi history, shown in the 1976 Venice Biennale and later in Bahnhof Museum in
Berlin, is dedicated to examining conflicts of interest between the market and the state.17
Tali’s research on museum philosophy, together with the writings of others who have considered
the problem of absence with respect to the museum, also focus on the importance of cultural
differences with respect to museum archiving processes and exhibitions as they relate to the symbolical
and representative roles of their communities.18 The findings concerning access to difficult
materials housed in museum archives as they relate to sensitive public community issues remains
subject to different readings depending on community values and the assessment of the knowledge
value of archival information in relation to community interests.
3 Artists’ Interventions into Museum Philosophy
In the late 20th century and beyond, artists including Marcel Broodthaers and others have sought
to intervene with their critique of the concept of the museum. Broodthaers created his own fictional
model museum re- invoking a critique of the museum based on a Dadaist notion of culture.
Artists of the mid-to-late 20th century and beyond such as Daniel Buren, Michael Asher, Louise
Lawler, Chris Burden, and Jeff Koons, among others, have invaded the museum with exhibitions
aimed at changing the philosophy of the museum by decoding or subverting the museum’s conventional
practices. The aim of these artists has been to unmask and create through their participation
in the museum public awareness of perceived links between the museum and the dominant
political and economic powers operative within the larger culture.
Curtis
L. Carter
440
4 Philosophers and the Museum
Among the academic philosophers of the 20th century who have offered substantive reflections on the museum are John Dewey, Hilde Hein, Nelson Goodman, and Arthur Danto. Their efforts will serve as a beginning measure of the interest of philosophers in writing about museums up to the present.19
4.1 John Dewey
Dewey’s charge to those who choose to write on the philosophy of the fine arts is “ t o restore con-tinuity between refined and intensified forms of experience that are works of art and every day events, doings, and sufferings that are universally recognized to constitute experience.”20 Accord-ingly, Dewey’s philosophy of the museum is driven mainly by avoidance of the separation of art from common life experiences, with the implication that art in the museum purports to represent a superior cultural standing.21 He argues “ t hat theories which isolate art and its appreciation by placing them in a realm of their own, disconnected from other modes of experiencing, are not inherent in the s ubject- m atter but arise because of specifiable extraneous conditions.”22 Hence, his contributions to museum philosophy are focused mainly on advancing museum education that would foster exploring aesthetics in everyday life, together with advancing the support of democracy and social justice.
In his essay, “ Art E ducation- Education in Art” published in 1927, Dewey charges the museum with “ i ntellectual celibacy” for its removal of art from everyday experience and thus for contribut-ing to the neglect of aesthetic perception in the realm of education. Apart from his critique of the museum, his main contribution to normative museum philosophy is the argument that, “ the role of the museum is to train the viewer of art to see so that these aesthetic lessons can be incorporated into everyday life.” 23 One outcome of museum experiences thus is to bring forth the connections between the aesthetic features of everyday experiences that produce enjoyment and the experi-ences offered by fine art in the museum. Thus, Dewey’s point is that the generation of works of art that find a place in the museum is integrally linked to aesthetic experiences of everyday living.
For Dewey, changing conditions in industry such as mechanization have pushed the artist to one side from the main spheres of active interests. Artists, he argued, cannot work mechanically for mass production. Similarly, the gap between museum art and the experiences of everyday is extended when mass society entertains the substitution of cheap mass production and pursues activities that once demanded higher standards of craftsmanship and care with lesser attention to aesthetic considerations.
Not all of Dewey’s experiences with the museum resulted in his taking a critical view. He found solace in his collaboration with museum founder Dr. Albert C. Barnes, who shared his in-terest in aesthetic education. Barnes founded a museum in in 1922 in Merion, Pennsylvania, with a particular notion of museum education based in part on Dewey’s approach to aesthetic educa-tion.24 Dewey and Barnes worked together for many years to advance their mutual understanding of a philosophy of museum education for art.25
4.2 Hilde Hein
Hilde Hein (1932–), author of The Museum in Transition: A Philosophical Perspective(2000,Smith-sonian Institution) and Public Art: Thinking Museums Differently ( 2 006) grounds her approach to museum philosophy in a combination of her work in philosophical aesthetics with museum in-ternships at the Smithsonian and other museums. Hein argues that the task of museum philosophy is to “ seek out the implicit and often unexpressed thoughts that are hidden in the workings of
Museum
as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
441
human institutions and actions.”26 On her view, museums accomplish materially what philosophers
do conceptually, introducing multiple worlds through their exhibitions and thus contribute
to philosophical understanding. Hein does not see philosophy’s role to give practical advice
concerning museums. Rather, the aim of museum philosophy is to seek clarification of thinking
concerning museum’s ends in relation to ethical, epistemological, and aesthetics aims.
For example, one of the concerns confronting museums today is tension between traditional
object- based practices in the museum and contemporary demands focused on museum experiences.
One question that contemporary museums must address is the question, whether a focus
on museum experiences and education should preempt the museum’s tradition of care and presentation
of art objects. Hein’s main contribution to museum philosophy may well be her call for
thoughtful analysis of both “ museum experiences” and the role of art objects in the ongoing work
of the museum. This issue is of particular importance to assessing the cognitive role of museum
experiences. It is also a question raised by funding sources essential to the museum’s continued
existence. In a subsequent work on the philosophy of the museum ( Public Art: Thinking Museums
Differently, 2006).27 Hein argues that the museum is an agent, not a repository, with social and
moral influence and responsibilities to engage in public service. The Museum in Hein’s view is
charged with promoting participatory experiences that aim to elicit subjective experience.
4.3 Nelson Godman
Nelson Goodman ( 1 906– 1 998) fostered a close relationship to the art museum throughout his life.
His interest was both personal and philosophical. As a major art collector and former art dealer
in Boston, he engaged with the museum as a collector of art works and as a museum donor of art
works from his personal collection to various museum collections including the museums at Harvard
University and elsewhere. His writings on the museum address key issues for our topic based
on his experience as art collector and professor of aesthetics and his interest in arts education.
Perhaps Goodman’s most salient contribution to museum philosophy resides in his account of
the role that museums have in the activation of art works, or making them work in the experiences
of museum visitors and the communities that they serve. Apart from traditional museum roles,
collecting and conserving art, he views activation of works of art as the central task of the museum
while making art accessible for purposes of study, enjoyment, and education.28
Activation here refers to enabling the functioning of art in the experiences of viewers necessary
to supporting the cognitive functioning of a work of art in a viewer’s experience, as well as
activating art’s and the museum’s roles in education and in the community. Activation takes place
through the processes of collecting, archiving, and exhibiting works of art with sensitive attention
to lighting, pairings of works for comparison with the aim of enabling art’s contributions to
human understanding. Activation also functions through art education and through other roles
that the museum serves in the community. In short, the aim of the museum is to bring insight and
understanding to art and its place in human societies through its various means of activating art.29
Fundamental to Goodman’s views on the museum is the problem of how to make the art works
work, and what would be the measures of success? Goodman’s answer is thus:
Works work when by stimulating inquisitive looking, sharpening perception, raising visual
intelligence, widening perspectives, bringing out new connections and contrasts, and marking
off neglected significant kinds they participate in the organization and reorganization of
experience and thus in making and remaking our worlds.30
For Goodman, the “ systematism of symbol theory begun in Languages of Art to the study of
the differences and interrelationships among the abilities involved in the arts” offers clues to the
Curtis L. Carter
442
activation of art in the museum.31 In short, the paintings and sculptures in museums do not ask why museums exist, just as the plays and music answer the call for justification by the experiences that they provide to their audiences, so do paintings and sculptures in the museum.
As Goodman views the role of philosophy, it is not the business of the philosopher to determine the answers to technical problems such as the problems of lighting in a museum setting. However, he notes that a concept of light is both essential to activating art and also contributory to its decay, thus creating issues relating to conservation. Hence, philosophers can weigh in on the value issues concerning the role of light in activation art in the museum, such as preservation versus access of the art to the viewing public.
In a second essay on the museum, “ T he End of the Museum?,” presented as an address to an Annual Meeting of the American Association of Museums, Goodman argues that museums, like libraries, are fundamentally educational as opposed to being recreational. Apropos of his interest in the museum’ role in education, Goodman founded Project Zero, at the Harvard Graduate School of Education in 1967. The purpose of Project Zero was “ a dvancement of the arts through improved education of artists, audiences, and management” as a means of fostering museum and other means of art education.32
4.4 Danto
Arthur Danto ( 1924– 2013), whose experiences as art critic and aesthetician have led to his com-mentary on the museum, introduces a different set of issues relevant to museum philosophy. Danto’s reflections on the philosophy of the museum take place during the period of the transition from modern art which began in the early 20th century to contemporary art of the mid-to-late 20th century and beyond. The rapid shifting of artistic modes during this era has proved challeng-ing to museums as they contemplate meaningful responses, including altering museum structures and practices to accommodate the changes.
Danto’s contributions to museum philosophy appear throughout his philosophical essays in aesthetics published in After the End of Art and in Embodied Meanings, as well as throughout his art criticism.33 In these writing, the museum is frequently cited as the setting for his interpretations of visual art. For example, Danto’s essay, “ Mu seums and the Thirsting Millions” represents the mu-seum as a source of existentially life transformative experiences, or experiences that provide “ a vi-sion of the world and of the meaning of living in the world” such as was described by Ruskin in a letter to his father in 1848 after viewing in a municipal gallery Veronese’s painting, Queen of Sheba. While it could not be expected that every visit to a museum would result in a life transforming experience, Danto finds the possibility of the museum offering such experiences as justification for its maintenance and continuation of exhibitions of art therein.34
As Danto proposes in another essay dedicated to the museum, “ Mu seum and Merengue,” once people enter the museum, it is important that they find something that they could not already get in the culture outside the museum.”35 This second essay opens with Danto’s reflections on attend-ing a museum event at the Whitney Museum in New York after conversations with a taxi driver on the way to the Museum. His thoughts focus in part on the question of what a museum might offer a taxi driver from the street or an immigrant Dominican child on first entry to the museum. The discussion proceeds to questions relating to how to prepare the child or the taxi driver for en-tering the museum. How, for example, might the museum show its connection to essential human needs? In some instances, the architecture of the museum itself might even appear forbidding. The discussion proceeds to the question of the contemporary museum’s ability to meet the aesthetic needs of contemporary society.
Until recent times, neither of these issues, preparing the child for entry or efforts to connect the museum to essential human needs, as cited in Danto’s writings here, has received noteworthy
Museum
as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
443
attention from philosophers. Rather, the foundations of much of how museums have approached
presenting art to their visitors is focused on art appreciation and art history with little attention to
how these elements central to the museum relate to life outside the museum. So, the question is,
how, in Danto’s words, will museums address the thirsting crowds who “ search for an art of their
own?” Whether the call is a call for popular culture or “ l ow art” exhibitions, or contemporary
avant-garde experimental arts on behalf of artists, or ethnic variations in museum collections or exhibitions
based on the demand for cultural diversity, or gender- based representation, the museum
faces cultural and social changes such that it is called upon to accommodate in order to maintain
its role in a time of social and cultural change.
Danto addresses the museum in terms of the changes in the practices of art over time. In his
museum philosophy, the museum itself with a history of collecting and exhibiting art is part of
a cultural infrastructure that must deal with the changes in art as well as changing issues in the
culture where the museum exists. However, he argues that art of the past is available for use by
contemporary art, even though the origin of art of the past differs from the spirit of contemporary
art. Hence, “ all art has a rightful place, where there is no a priori criterion as to what art must look
like and no narrative into which the museum’s content must all fit.”36 In short as Danto sees it, the
museum as it exists today is open to an array of living artistic options, including addressing the art
of the past, while being subject to constant re-arrangements.
5 Other Recent Ventures into Museum Philosophy
Essays which view the museum through the lenses of contemporary philosophical frames are now
beginning to appear more frequently. The result is an emerging 21st- century literature of museum
philosophy issues in couched in various categories of philosophical discourse. Representative of
these interests are collections of essays such as Philosophy and Museums: Essays on the Philosophy
of Museums ( 2 006) edited by Hugh H. Genoway with 15 essays by contemporary philosophers.
Among the topics discussed in these recent volumes focused on the philosophy of the museum
are such issues as: the value of museums in general, the ontology and epistemology of museum
objects and exhibitions, museum ethics, the cognitive role of the museum in generating knowledge,
questions of meaning and interpretation, and various other matters of philosophical interest
concerning museums. Among the provocative essays in the volume edited by Genoway is Jean
Paul Martinson’s “ Museums and Restlessness.” Martinson argues that at present the museum is
a key institution situated in relation to both a past which it protected and preserved and a future
into which it is projected.37
Victoria S. Harrison, Anna Bergqvist, and Gary Kemp ( Eds.)’s Philosophy and Museums: Essays
on the Philosophy of Museums ( 2016) offers additional insights into museum philosophy. This volume
of essays, with essays attending both to art museums and other museums, draws upon the
thoughts of contemporary aestheticians including those working within analytic philosophy and
beyond, as well as museum scholars and museum practitioners.38
Among the issues discussed in this volume are questions concerning the meaning of exhibited
objects. In this context, Garry L. Hagberg and Anna Bergqvist employ analytic philosophy to
augment subjectivist and objectivist accounts of museum object meanings. Ivan Gaskell, aesthetician
and museum curator, contends that the principal value of museums is their contributions to
cognitive activities as sites of scholarship through research resulting in exhibitions and scholarly
catalogues.39 Other authors represented in this volume address questions relating to museum ethics
and the different publics served by museums, with reference to philosophical authors past and
contemporary including Heidegger, Popper, Descartes, and Spinoza.
Moving toward other philosophical issues pertaining to the museum are questions concerning
museums and public art. This topic is addressed from a variety of perspectives relating to art
Curtis
L. Carter
444
history and museum education in the collection, Museums and Public Art edited by Cher Krause Knight and Harriet F. Senie.40 One of the issues important for understanding philosophy of the museum addressed by Knight and Senie is the question of art in public spaces in reference to mu-seums. For example, does public art refer solely to work that resides outside the secured museum space itself where it is protected with strict security rules, climate control, and limited access? Or should the meaning of the term public art be understood also include the space of the museum itself, which is not always accessible to the public due to open hours or admission fees?41 As muse-ums face challenging changes in the evolving cultures of the 21st century and beyond, museums find it necessary to review museum identity which requires changes in the concept of museum itself.
Mainly absent from discussions of museum philosophy as considered by the philosophical com-munity is a discussion of the economic role that museums play. However, economic consider-ations play a major role in all aspects of museum operations from acquisitions policies and the availability of exhibition space to direct or indirect influences on the art market. Within capitalist cultures, museums and their art collections also function as objects of economic interest. The museum as a not-for-profit educational institution does not participate directly in the art market except through its purchases and exchange. However, its collection decisions may affect the art market values as its collection standards serve as an important aesthetic standard for valuing the works of individual artists. Similarly, its choice of exhibition topics may influence art market value by featuring the works of a particular artist or by highlighting a particular period style of art through its exhibitions and publications. On another level, the museum’s role with art collectors may indirectly contribute to economic gains when the art is donated to acquire tax deductions. All of these issues may affect the way the core activities of the museum are carried out. As well, the art museum serves to enrich urban cultures through its role as a popular tourist venue.
6 Further Reflections on Museum Philosophy Today
There are a number of ongoing developments today that affect the directions of museum phi-losophy. In the late 20th century and beyond, artists such as Marcel Broodthaers have sought to intervene with their critique of the concept of the museum. Broodthaers created his own fictional model museum r e- invoking a critique of the museum based on Dadaist critique of culture.42 Other artists, such as Daniel Buren, Michael Asher, Louise Lawler, Chris Burden, Hans Haake, and Jeff Koons, have invaded the museum with exhibitions aimed at decoding or subverting the museum’s conventional practices. Their intent has been to unmask perceived links between the museum and the dominant political and economic powers operative within the larger culture.
No wonder that artists see the need to address museum philosophy. The artists have invested their works with images that are intended to invite a dialogue with the viewers resulting in a contribution to the viewer’s knowledge and understanding. For the artist, the museum offers a public presence through contemporary art exhibitions and retrospective exhibitions and gallery selections from the museum’s permanent collections and offers an antidote to the problem of absence noted earlier. This public presence for the artist in the museum represents the highest form of cultural legitimization for the artists’ creations. It validates the artist’s standing in the art world and makes accessible the artist’s work for the public to experience. For both aesthetic and economic reasons, artists have seen fit to offer their critique of the art museum.
Curators too have moved beyond the traditional tasks of care and presentation of exhibition art within the walls of the museum.43 For example, already the experimental art works that museums currently display now extends into public spaces. “ Museum in the Streets,” organized by Moderna Galeria, the Museum of Modern Art in Ljubljana, Slovenia, cited by Cristin Nae, offers a challenge to the conventional idea of a museum by extending the museum into the street in “ a m onth long
Museum
as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
445
series of public events, interventions, installations, and various forms of visual communication.”44
This exhibition, together with other contemporary museum experiments with outreach projects,
raises important questions of interest to museum philosophy as to the future understanding of the
concept “ museum” and its material manifestations into the changing cultures of the 21st century.
Such ventures, while in keeping with making art accessible to the public, take the museum well
beyond its initial roles of collecting and caring for works of art. Moving beyond the contemplative
interior environments of traditional museum spaces, the experiences offered to visitors encountering
museum art in the streets link art directly to the environments and objects of everyday life.
Museum archives, which have received relatively little attention in reflections on museum philosophy,
also warrant consideration here. The work of Margaret Tali and others in recent museum
studies have brought this issue to attention though their interest in the concept of absence as it
applies to museums. Discursive absence, as noted in Tali’s study, Absence and Difficult Knowledge in
Contemporary Art Museums, occurs when the art work does not appear in exhibitions, textual or
other means of professional or public communication such as books and magazines specializing in
art.45 Absence in the museum context refers to physical absence as when the work remains in storage
or is deaccessioned. Absence as it relates to museums also concerns phenomenological absence
when the work is not present in the experience of the museum or the art public.
Museum archives serve multiple purposes necessary to preserve the identity of art works including
maintaining records of acquisition and related donor issues, exhibition records, and records
of physical condition of art works in a museum setting. Additionally, the museum archive
is responsible to maintain information concerning works not available to the public including records
of acquisition processes, confidential donor engagements in museum activities, deaccessioning
of works from the collection, exhibition records including the exhibition record of individual
works including works not on display in the museum or elsewhere. Questions of museum ethics
may arise, for example, with respect to such archives related matters as the influence of major
donors on acquisitions, purchases, or display of art works.
Whether, or when, art works emerge from a state of absence in the museum depends mainly on
the practices employed by the museum curators who determine both exhibition plans and display
or of works from the museum’s permanent collections, and the museum registrar with oversight
over records and material condition of works. Such determinations may depend upon aesthetic
considerations, political ideology, art historical fashion, changing public taste, the focus of critical
and art historical practices. Additionally, practical considerations such as material condition of the
art, competition for gallery spaces available to exhibit the works, and the safety of the art work
may influence the absence of a work of art.
7 The State- of- the- Art Museum Today
What then follows for understanding of the state-of-the-art museum today? The problems facing
museums today are not yet at the state that art museum in Russia faced at the beginning of the
20th century. Recall that when the Constructivists gained control of the museums just after the
Revolution, their museum philosophy proposed to place the museum in the hands of the artists
and transform the museum into a living laboratory where it was possible to see art transformed
into labor, thus aiding in the understanding of work and the worker’s ideology of the Soviet state.
Today’s museums face a very different societal climate. But still a climate where traditional roles
for the museum as a repository for cultural artifacts with responsibility is to care for and exhibit
art for the benefit of the public is called into question and under review on many levels. Museums
in war zones or as target of ideological attacks remain vulnerable.
Central to its societal roles are the art museum’s activities as a source of generating communicating,
and preserving knowledge both in the forms of physical images ( p aintings, sculptures,
Curtis
L. Carter
446
works on paper, installations, etc.) and in related publications and archival documents. In addition to educating the public toward appreciating and relating art to other aspects of life, including knowledge as well as creative leisure, the museum must join with universities in generating and preserving art scholarship commensurate with knowledge in other fields. Aside from hosting ex-hibitions, creating art publications, offering innovative art education, one important role of the museum is to serve as an essential force for distribution of knowledge in contemporary cultures across the world.
At the core of questions arising in the minds of both museum audiences and funding sources pertaining to the current and future states of the art museum is the impact of media technology which makes accessible images of art without a trip to the museum. Philosophers ( G oodman for example) argue that the experience of a work of art thru media technologies, while useful to rein-force a visit to the museum, does not provide the same quality of experience as viewing art in the museum. Still art’s availability thru media technology is deemed sufficient by growing numbers of potential museum attendees.
Museum audiences today differ in their interests in the content of museum exhibitions. Major artist’s names of prior stages in art history whether Renaissance, Impressionist, Modern, or Con-temporary ( M ichelangelo, Renoir, Picasso, Warhol) continue to draw attention. But there is a growing lack of knowledge or interest in earlier stages of art history especially among younger audiences.46 This is a major problem for museums whose collections are oriented to earlier stages of art history. Add to this the challenges some contemporary museum audience members experi-ence with the changing vocabularies of modern or contemporary arts: abstraction or m ulti- media.
Also presenting a challenge to art museums today is addressing the role of curatorship and exhibitions with respect to contemporary social issues. What role, for example, might the art museum play in shaping the identities of diverse communities, and in interpreting their cultural identities and history? Or what is the responsibility of the museum to address gender inequities in museum collections and exhibitions? Should the curatorship assume an activist or advocacy position? If so how does this practice relate to the independence of curatorial scholarship? What then might we expect of museum curatorship for the arts and culture in a democratic society with respect to cultural controversies? The challenge of activists to museums is out: museums are being asked to be transparent and socially responsible and to avoid receiving funding from sources that derive their resources from producers of socially harmful sources.47
Poet activist Jamara Wakefield poses to museum philosophy a challenge concerning the role of the museum in contemporary social issues such as racism in these words: “ Mu seums could be one of our greatest allies in liberation struggles. They have the physical space, the means, and the public confidence to partake in a large scale social movement against colonial powers….”48 Incoming Secretary of the Smithsonian Museums Lonnie Bunch in response to a question about the statement, “ Museums are not neutral” means to him. His reply:
“ I t is crucially important for museums to open the veil of how they do the work they do so that even they understand the complicit bias they carry. They understand the cultural baggage that shapes what we do.”
8 Concluding Remarks
Today, the art museum functions as a cultural mirror. When referring to the museum as a mirror, we refer not to a particular reflective surface, but to a process of social mirroring focused on art as a set of cultural practices. The art museum embraces many styles and subjects and features art from across the world. Its concerns include issues relating to the museum’s role in the experiences of individuals and its place in the shaping of past and present cultures. At its best, the art museum shines a light on human creativity. The museum reflects both a presence and an absence as it seeks
Museum as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
447
to contribute to a well- f ormed society and to individuals’ opportunities for acquiring knowledge
and cultural understanding. At its worst, the museum exhibits in its structures and its practices the
problems of the communities through mirroring discrimination and exclusion.
Today’s art museums face a very different social climate, one where traditional roles for the
museum as a repository for cultural artifacts whose responsibility is to care for and exhibit for the
benefit of the public, is called into question on many levels. The problems of museums in our
age differ from the crisis of the museum in Russia at the beginning of the 20th century when the
Constructivists who aimed to transform the museum into a living laboratory for the worker artists
gained control of the, museums with plans to replace art in the museum with their own machine
inspired constructions. The intervention of artists into the museum of recent times offers critique
of museum practices, but does not envision replacing the art or the public audiences. The situation
of the museum today differs, too, from the times of revolutionary fervor that opened the doors of
the Louvre and required accommodating museum visitors lacking in the knowledge of art necessary
for appreciating and understanding museum art of the great masters. And yet the concern
expressed by philosophers ( Dewey, Hein, Goodman) for museum education cited earlier would
suggest that the problems of educating museum visitors have not gone away.
Currently, the museum faces a very different social and political climate than has been common
in its previous history. Traditional roles for the museum as a repository for cultural artifacts,
whose primary role have been to care for and exhibit for the benefit of the public, are being called
into question on many levels. At the core of such questioning is the role of museum curatorship
and exhibitions and their relation to politics in a democratic society. What roles, for example,
might the museum play in shaping the identities of diverse communities, and in interpreting diverse
cultural identities? Should the museum assume an activist or advocacy position? If so how
does this affect the independence of its contributions to knowledge? What then might we expect
of museum curatorship for the arts and culture in a democratic society?
Questions concerning the role of curatorship, exhibitions, and the role of donors in relation to
museum advocacy and politics are barely below the surface in contemporary discussions among art
museum professionals as they reflect on the role of the museum. What role for example might art
museums play in shaping the identities of diverse communities, and in interpreting their cultural
identities and history? This topic raises many questions of substance. Should curatorship assume
an activist or advocacy position? If so how does this affect the scholarly independence of curatorial
scholarship? What exactly might we expect of museum curatorship for the arts and culture in a
democratic society? Can the museum serve as a safe place for democratic dialogue on such issues
as social justice, global equality?
Such questions involving the social role of the museum figure currently in the agendas of
national and international meetings of museum professionals these days. A gathering of three art
museums directors of leading US museums to contemplate issues confronting museums today assembled
recently at the Brooklyn Museum for a discussion labeled, “ Women Leaders in the Arts.”49
The main problems cited in the discussion were not concerning women leaders in the museum
field but on a “ culture of intolerance that puts pressure on institutions both from the right and the
left.” Maintaining the museum as “ a space for democratic dialogue and an inclusive audience” in
the face of challenges, sometimes even a culture of meanness, seemed to be the main concerns of
the museum directors participating in this forum as museums deal with such problems as scrutiny
over museum board members and donors’ gifts.
A question posed to museum directors gathered in Kyoto, Japan for a meeting of International
Council of Museums in September 2019 gathered to discuss the future of the museum in the 21st
century was this: “ S hould museums be more or less ideological?” This question, along with questions
aimed at producing a new definition of the concept of museum incorporating democratic
values, social justice and human dignity, and planetary well- b eing, was postponed as being too
Curtis L. Carter
448
controversial. This proposed definition if adopted would replace a prior long- standing under-standing of the museum focused on acquiring, conserving, and communicating cultural heritage for the purpose of education, study, and enjoyment.50
What then is the role of museum philosophy in aiding the art museum with its challenges to-day? Perhaps the answer should begin with a question: is there a need for the art museum today given the availability of technology and other forms of access to art as a source of knowledge? One argument in support of interest of the public in sustaining the art museum is the participation of volunteers. Museums in the United States, especially, have been driven by a spirit of volunteerism and the belief that it is a civic duty to provide for cultural institutions. Add to this that, despite growing economic barriers, art museum audiences persisting as crowds at city museums remain strong and serve as an integral part of city life for visitors and resident.
Further, the museum’s role as chief presenter of art to the public and as archivist of art and historical records pertaining to art is essential to the collection and preservation of art from past the centuries and into the present. The answer to our question based on the history of knowledge relating to art suggests that, despite its flaws and problems, the museum remains an essential source of the knowledge expressed thru art. And despite other forms of preserving and communicating knowledge, art contributes a range of experiences not available in other symbolic media as shown in the writings of Goodman and other aestheticians.
Philosophy of the museum can facilitate understanding the place of the art museum as an im-portant cultural institute by providing concepts and arguments that contribute to understanding the art museum and help to show the special roles that art museums plays in human experience. As well, philosophy of the museum can assume a role of advocacy for the art museum on the grounds that the museum is essential to accumulate and sustain the ongoing deposits of human culture throughout history.
As it stands, however, it must be said that museum philosophy in its current state of develop-ment is in beginning stages. Given our findings here, few philosophers have in depth knowledge or understanding of museums based on attention to the history of the museum or institutional museum practices. For philosophers to limit their interest in viewing the museum simply as op-portunities to apply preconceived general philosophical frames drawn from preconceived notions of ontology, epistemology, and ethics, for example, to the museum will be insufficient to advanc-ing philosophy of the art museum.
Here is where the scholarly studies of the museums in other fields as noted here benefit the development of museum philosophy. It is necessary for philosophers who write about the art mu-seum to become well informed concerning the history and evolution of the museum itself and its contemporary practices. A knowledge of aesthetic theories and their relation to the societal roles of art and its institutions can provide a basis for approaching this task. From our examination of art museum philosophy here, it seems clear that the philosophers who have contributed most successfully to museum philosophy are those such as Dewey, Hein, Goodman, and Danto whose reflections on the museum are based on their engagements with art and the role of the museum in education and other societal concerns of relevance to museums.
Museum philosophers of the future will find their tasks increasingly extended as specialized museums raise new issues for discussion. How, for example, do we understand media arts and other innovative art forms in the context of the art museum? Already there exist now museums dedicated to film, photography, and digital media. Perhaps philosophy of the museum in its best efforts will be of assistance to the museum professionals who are wrestling with problems such as redefining the role of the museum and how to address other issues pertaining to museum leader-ship in the context of contemporary societal changes.
What then has museum philosophy to offer the study of the art museum? One approach to museum philosophy would be to develop museum philosophy under the standard categories of
Museum as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
449
philosophy: ethics, epistemology, metaphysics, or analytic aesthetics. In its present state, however,
the most fully developed approaches to art museum philosophy remain focused on museum education
and societal issues including museum ethics pertaining to the workings of art museums
with attention to knowledge claims concerning exhibited art objects in the art museum setting.
These developments in museum philosophy take place alongside and benefit from, what is occurring
in museum history, museology, art history. Philosophers Dewey, Hein, Goodman have
each pioneered in providing conceptual foundations for important art education practices in art
museums. Danto in his reflections on the art museum calls upon the art museum to offer experiences
not available elsewhere and challenges the art museum to be prepared to meet major cultural
changes that may challenge its relevance. Each of these philosophers has chosen to use philosophy
as a means of reaching out into the worlds where the art museum functions by offering philosophical
insights that, alongside the views of others, may benefit the museum in implementing its
personal and societal roles. In short, the task of art museum philosophy is to critically examine
and advance the art museum as “ a public heritage”51 ( Bourdieu) where people can explore past and
new ways of experiencing art as one of the essential human symbolic expressions.
*Note: Thanks to Wang Zhi, Peking University School of Arts, for comments on a prior draft of the paper and
for providing a translation of Wu Hung’s “ Art History and Art Museum” from Chinese to English.
Notes
1 Recent efforts to address this lacuna include a collection of essays, on the philosophy of museums: Victoria
S. Harrison, Anna Bergqvist, and Gary Kemp ( Eds.), Philosophy and Museums: Essays on the Philosophy
of Museums ( Cambridge University Press, 2016). Questions posed in this collection included: the value
of museums, the meaning of exhibited objects, knowledge claims and museum presentations, emotional
and cognitive aspects of museum experiences, and the need for museums to direct their focus toward
innovative thinking. Ivan Gaskell’s essay, “ Museums and Philosophy of A rt – a nd Many things, Part II,”
Philosophy Compass 7, 2012, offers further arguments as to why philosophy has an interest in museums.
2 See for example, Urs Raussmüller, “ The Museum as Concept and Philosophy,” Lecture published in
Denkraum Museum, Arkitektur Forum, Zürich, Editor Moritz Küng, 1992.
3 Wu Hung, “ A rt History and Art Museum,” in Ten Essays on Art History: Meishushi Shi Y (Beijing: SDX
Joint Publishing Company, 2008), 27–39.
4 The discussion here will focus on the art museum, as there are also historical, scientific, and other culturally
specific museums.
5 Per Bjurstrom, “ Physiocratic Ideals and National Galleries,” in The Art Museum in the 18th Century
( Stockholm: National Museum, 1993), 30.
6 De Piles, Cours de peinture par principles ( Paris, 1708), McClellan, 62.
7 Andrew McClellan, “ The Museum and it’s Public in Eighteenth Century France,” in the Art Museum in
the 18th Century, Ed. Petit de Bjurström, 62.
8 Petit de Bauchamont, Essay on Paintings, 1751.
9 The Capitoline Museum began in 1471 with a contribution of sculptures to the citizens of Rome. The
British Museum in London was founded in 1753 and opened to the public in 1759. The Hermitage in
Saint Petersberg in Russia was founded by Catherine the Great in 1764 and opened to the public in 1852.
The Charleston Museum in the United States was founded in 1773 and opened to the public in 1824.
10 J. L. David, Rapport de’cret sur la fe’te de la Re’union re’publicaine du 10 aout ( Pari, 1793), 4.
11 Pierre Bordieu and Alain Darbel, The Love of Art: European Museums and Their Public (Stanford University
Press, 1980), 37–70.
12 David Bestley, Douglas Macagy and the Foundations of Modern Art Curatorship ( Simcoe, ON: Davus Publishing,
1998), 114, 115.
13 Tony Bennett, The Birth of the Museum ( London, New York: Routledge, 1995), 8, 9.
14 Stephen E. Weil, Making Museums Matter ( Washington, DC and London: Smithsonian Institute Press,
2002), 200–213.
15 Hugh H. Genoways and Mary Anne Andrei, Museum Origins: Readings in Early Museum History and Philosophy
(Left Coast Press, 2008), 49–96.
Curtis
L. Carter
450
16 Margaret Tali, Absence and Difficult Knowledge in Contemporary Art Museums ( N ew York: Routledge, 2018), 14.
17 Joseph Beuys’s Transtop was first created for the Venice Biennale in 1976 and then transferred to the Hamburger Bahnhof in Berlin.
18 Roger I Simmons, A Pedagogy of Witnessing. Curatorial Practice and the Pursuit of Social Justice(New York: Suny Press, 2014).
19 Pierre Bourdieu’s collaboration with Alain Darbel and others in the study recounted in their book, The Love of Art represents another engagement of a philosopher with the experiences of the art museum is based on empirical research comparing the visitors’ experiences of viewers from different social backgrounds.
20 John Dewey, Art as Experience ( New York: Minton, Balch, & Company, 1934), 3.
21 John Dewey, Art as Experience ( New York: Minton, Balch, & Company, 1934), 8, 9.
22 John Dewey, Art as Experience ( New York: Minton, Balch, & Company, 1934), 10.
23John Dewey, “Art in Education-Education in Art,” [1926] John Dewey: The Latest Works 1925–1953,Vol.2, Ed. Boylston (Carbondale: Sothern University Press), 113–114.
24 George E. Hein, “ John Dewey and Albert C. Barnes: A deep and Mutually Rewarding Friendship,” Dewey Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1 ( S pring 2017), 44– 7 8. Barnes, founder of a pharmaceutical manufacturing company in Philadelphia, introduced the study of philosophy to his employees’ daily schedule. The Museum established by Barnes now resides in Philadelphia.
25 Hilde Hein, The Museum in Transition ( Washington, DC: Smithsonian, 2000).
26 Nelson Goodman, “ Art in Action,” Encyclopedia of Aesthetics, Vol. 3, 2014–2018.
27 Hilda Hein, Public Art: Thinking Museums Differently (New York: Altamira Press, 2006), 15–23.
28 Nelson Goodman, “ Art in Action,” Encyclopedia of Aesthetics, Vol. 3, 2014–2018.
29 Nelson Goodman, “ Art in Action.” Encyclopedia of Aesthetics, Vol. 3, Michael Kelley, editor, 217.
30 Nelson Goodman, “ The End of the Museum?,” in Of Mind and Other Matters (Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press,1984), 179–184.
31 Nelson Goodman, Languages of Art (Indianapolis and New York: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc, 1968), xi.
32 Nelson Goodman, “ Art in Action,” in Of Mind and Other Matters ( Cambridge, MA and London: Har vard University Press, 1984), 150, 151.
33 Arthur C. Danto, in After the End of Art ( Princeton University, The A. W. Mellon Lectures in the Fine Arts, 1995). Arthur C. Danto, Embodied Meanings: Critical Essays and Aesthetic Meditations (New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1994).
34 Arthur C. Danto, “M useums and the Thirsting Millions,” in After the End of Art (Princeton University, The A. W. Mellon Lectures in the Fine Arts, 1995), 176, 177, 180.
35 Arthur C. Danto, “ Museum and Meringue,” in Embodied Meanings: Critical Essays and Aesthetic Medita tion (New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1994), 349–362.
36 Arthur C. Danto, After the End of Art ( Princeton University, The A. W. Mellon Lectures in the Fine Arts: 1995), 5.
37 Paul Martinson, “M useums and Restlessness,” in Genoway, Museum Philosophy for the Twenty-first Century ( Rowman and Littlefield, 2006) 60.
38 Victoria S. Harrison, Anna Bergqvist and Gary Kemp ( E ds.), Philosophy and Museums: Essays on the Phi losophy of Museums ( Cambridge University Press, 2016). This volume addresses both art museums and other forms of cultural museums.
39 See also Ivan Gaskell, “M useums and Philosophy of Art and Many Things” Part I, Part II, Philosophy Compass, 7, 2012. In these essays, Gaskell examines the topic of why philosophy of art and museums should have so little to do with each other. He attributes this to the alleged “ fall from epistemological grace” of museums as sites of scholarship in the 20th century. Gaskell offers a series of reasons as to why philosophers have good reasons to engage with museums related to the role of aesthetics, ethics, and epistemology and other cultural issues.
40 Cher Krause and Harriet F. Seine, Museums and Public Art? ( C ambridge Scholars Publishing, 2018), xviii.
41 An alternative take on public art and the museum is Larry Shiner’s research on museum architecture. See and Larry Shiner, “ Architecture versus Art: The Aesthetics of Art Museum Design,” Contemporary Aesthetics, Vol. 5 ( 2 007) and Larry Shiner, “ O n Aesthetics and Function in Architecture: The Case of the Spectacle Art Museum,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, Vol. 69, No. 1 (2011), 31–41.
42 Marcel Broodthaers, Museum, Musée d’art Moderne, Départment des Aigles, 1968.
43 For further information on the state of curating in the art museum see Curtis L. Carter, “ Curating: Overview,” Encyclopedia of Aesthetics Second Edition, Michael Kelley, Editor in Chief ( Oxford Univer sity Press, 2014), Vol. 2, 231–236.
Museum
as Mirror: The Art Museum as Cultural Mirror
451
452
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-52
43
CONSERVATION AND
RESTORATION
Rafael De Clercq
Conservation comprises a range of activities aimed at preserving or restoring objects, including
paintings and sculptures. Conceptually, preservation and restoration are easy to distinguish:
to preserve is to keep an object in its present c ondition— more realistically, to slow down its
deterioration— w hereas to restore is to return an object to a condition it used to be in ( M uñoz-
Viñas 2005, 1 5– 23). However, it is not always easy to distinguish preservation and restoration in
practice, since one and the same activity ( for example, cleaning or relining a painting) may have
both a preservative and a restorative aim.
An object can be preserved by controlling the humidity, light, and temperature in its environment,
but restoration always requires changing the object itself. Therefore, restorations are
more likely to give rise to controversy. Among the most well- k nown controversies is the National
Gallery’s cleaning of paintings, including Velázquez’ Philip IV of Spain in Brown and Silver, between
1936 and 1946. The cleaning was heavily criticized by prominent art historians such as Cesare
Brandi ( Brandi 1949) and Ernst H. Gombrich ( Gombrich 1962; see also Gombrich 1960, 49– 52).
In a similar vein, art historian James Beck and artist Michael Daley have taken aim at the more
recent cleaning of masterpieces such as Jacopo della Quercia’s Ilaria del Carretto and Michelangelo’s
Sistine Chapel ceiling frescoes and his David ( Beck and Daley 1994). Interestingly, they open their
book on the subject by noting that restoration is not a purely technical matter that can be left to
the “ faceless specialist in the favored white coat”, because “ we are really dealing with a field that
has divergent philosophical positions and approaches” ( Ibid., ix; my italics).
The word “ philosophical” is w ell- c hosen. Underlying the controversies are often philosophical
disagreements, for example, regarding the aim( s) and permissible means of restoration. More
specifically, the disagreements may concern such questions as the following: Should restoration
return the original appearance of the object, that is, roughly speaking, the appearance around the
time of completion of the work? If not, then which appearance is to be returned? And can the
restorer recreate this appearance by any means necessary? In what follows, these questions will
be addressed in terms of the ethical ( Section 1) and the metaphysical ( Section 2) issues they raise.
1 Ethical Issues
1.1 Should the Intentions of the Artist Be Respected?
It seems obvious that we should take into account the intentions of the artist whose work is being
considered for conservation; for example, his or her preferences regarding varnishes, patina, and
Conservation and Restoration
453
so on. The intentions of the artist plausibly determine which alterations are permitted during
restoration, and even which alterations can count as restorative. But should the intentions of the
artist always be respected? That is, should they outweigh other important considerations such as
the historical value, use value, and even aesthetic value of the work, when these other considerations
suggest a course of action that is different from the one desired by the artist? At least one
reputed expert on restoration, Ernst van de Wetering, has denied that they should, on the reasonable
ground that artists sometimes have wishes or hopes for their work that “ nobody in his right
mind”— no one who cares about c onservation— would want to fulfill ( van de Wetering 1989,
195). For example, van Gogh preferred some very aggressive procedures for flattening the surface
of his paintings, including the use of a razor blade and, possibly, a hot iron. Apparently, he never
managed to apply these procedures to some of his paintings, which left them with a crisp impasto.
Should the conscientious conservator then carry out the aggressive procedures on van Gogh’s
behalf ? It seems not.
In a similar vein, one may not want to remove old repaints just because they do not correspond
to the original artist’s intentions. After all, their removal may result in a seriously incomplete
image ( Bomford et al. 2009, 48). But if the intentions of the artist are not guaranteed to be of
utmost importance, then it seems that we should not state the aim of restoration in terms of these
intentions. For example, the following statements about the aim of restoration must seem to be
misguided:
Restoration implies returning the appearance of a painting to a state as close as possible to that
which the artist originally intended.
( Bomford 2003; my italics)
[R]estoration is to make as few alterations as possible while aiming to return those properties
that the artist intended the work to have, and which at some point after completion it actually
had.
( De Clercq 2013, 274; my italics)
Art historian and conservator David Scott has argued that we should reject such principles on the
ground that we are free to let our own cultural preferences regarding the appearance of an artwork
prevail over the artist’s intentions ( Scott 2017, 8 9– 9 0). However, note that the quoted principles
apply only once a decision has been made to restore the work. In other words, the principles do not
apply where the decided aim is mere preservation, as may be the case with some of van Gogh’s
paintings, or with ancient Chinese bronze vessels whose patina and corrosion we may have come
to value over their intended appearance ( Scott’s example in Ibid., 90). Moreover, even where the
principles apply, they do not prescribe, for example, getting rid of the crisp impasto on behalf of
the artist. After all, the principles state explicitly that the aim of restoration is to return properties to
a work. Obviously, the only properties that can be returned are properties that the work once had.
But some of van Gogh’s paintings never had a smooth surface after they were completed. Hence,
the principles do not imply that there is an obligation on the part of the restorer to return this
smoothness to the painting. In other words, restoring a work is not the same as finishing a work.
1.2 Can Integral Restoration Be Justified?
The restoration of Michelangelo’s Pietà sculpture, which was severely damaged in 1972 as a result
of vandalism, involved the replacement of parts carved by Michelangelo with parts cast by a restoration
team. Crucially, the naked eye cannot tell the new parts from the old parts. Some find
such ‘ integral’ restorations objectionable ( for example, Sagoff 1978). They favor a different, ‘ purist’
Rafael De Clercq
454
approach, one that highlights the changes that have been made by the restorer. The difference
between the two approaches has been usefully summarized by Mark Sagoff:
An integral restoration puts new pieces in the place of original fragments which have been
lost; a purist restoration limits itself to cleaning works of art and to reattaching original pieces
that may have fallen. Purists contend that nothing inauthentic— nothing not produced by
the original a rtist— may be shown. If damage obscures the style of the original, a purist may
allow a few substitutions, but only in outline or in another color, to avoid any pretense of
authenticity.
( Sagoff 1978, 457)
Integral restorations have long been regarded as unproblematic. However, from the 19th century
onward, a preference for purist restoration has been gaining ground. One consequence has been
the undoing of previous integral restorations out of a concern for authenticity. For example, both
the famous Laocoön and his Sons and the Lansdowne Herakles sculpture have been subjected to
de- r estorations in the 20th century ( the latter, however, was eventually d e- d e- r estored; for a philosophically
informed recounting of its restoration history, see Scott ( forthcoming)). Moreover,
many contemporary guidelines for the conservation of artworks and, more generally, cultural
heritage explicitly require that what is added during restoration be marked as such, so that even
ordinary viewers can tell what is by the hand of the original artist and what is not. To give just a
few examples:
If compensation is so extensive that it forms a substantial portion of the cultural property,
then the compensation should be visually apparent to all viewers ( American Institute for Conservation
of Historic and Artistic Work; my italics).
Source: <https://www.culturalheritage.org/docs/default-source/administration/governance/
commentaries-to-the-guidelines.pdf?sfvrsn=15> accessed 27 June 2019
All conservation procedures should be documented and as reversible as possible, and all alterations
should be clearly distinguishable from the original object or specimen ( International
Council of Museums [ICOM] Code of Ethics for Museums; my italics).
Source: <https://icom.museum/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/
ICOM-code-En-web.pdf> accessed 27 June 2019
Similar guidelines have been issued for the conservation of buildings.
Now the question is why purist restoration might be preferred. Perhaps it is found to be more
honest, because it requires one to highlight the changes that have been made during restoration.
In this way, restoration can be prevented from turning into “ hyper- restoration”: the kind of creative
and deceitful restoration— if “ restoration” is the appropriate word— that the Flemish restorer
Jef Van der Veken ( 1 872– 1 964) has become w ell- k nown for. However, integral restoration is compatible
with textual and photographic documentation of the changes that were made. As long as
the documentation is made publicly available, it seems that no dishonesty is involved.
Purist restoration might also be preferred because it is less likely to cause permanent damage.
However, integral restoration is compatible with reversible changes ( or “ re- treatability”). In sum,
as long as one follows commonly adopted guidelines, recommending documentation of changes
and reversible interventions, it seems that there is no reason to prefer purist restoration to integral
restoration.
Still, there is a more philosophical worry that integral restoration gives rise to. The worry
is based on the plausible assumption that works of art cannot acquire parts after having been
Conservation
and Restoration
455
completed ( Ruskin 1989[1880], Sagoff 1978, Elgin 1997, De Clercq 2013, De Clercq 2020). In
other words, anything added after completion inevitably remains extraneous or alien, especially if
it has been added by someone other than the original artist. As a consequence, it might be argued
that integral restoration creates a hybrid object: a combination of an original work of a rt— b y an
artist— and a r eplica— by a r estorer— of lost or damaged parts. ( Think again of Michelangelo’s
Pietà.) But now the question arises of how we can experience such a hybrid object in an appropriate
way, if we do not perceive the boundary between the original and the replicated part. As
Sagoff formulates the problem:
An integral restoration confronts the viewer with a juxtaposition at c ross- purposes with
itself— a n art object, created at a particular place and time for artistic purposes, and a replica
created to resemble it, which is a practical purpose, with no line between.
( Sagoff 2017, 329; see also Sagoff 1978, 460– 461)
A proponent of integral restoration might want to challenge the assumption on which the worry
is based, namely, that a restorer cannot, for metaphysical reasons, add parts to a finished work.
However, it is not clear whether rejecting the assumption is enough to put the worry to rest. After
all, even if an artwork can acquire new parts, it remains the case that parts produced by a restorer
will have a different origin. In particular, as Sagoff points out, they will have been made with different
intentions; first and foremost, with the intention of replacing the old parts. In addition, the
new parts may have been produced using different materials and techniques; for example, casting
instead of carving. As a result, it seems that they should not be experienced in the same way as the
old parts (pace Wreen 1985).
Perhaps a more successful response to the worry raised by Sagoff is the following: an integrally
restored work of art such as Michelangelo’s Pietà can still be experienced in an appropriate way,
even if its new parts are not visibly different from its old parts. After all, we are not supposed to experience
a work of art in a fragmented way, by focusing exclusively on the aesthetic character of its
parts ( say, the nose of the Madonna). Instead, we are supposed to experience it as a whole. And the
perceptible— stylistic, representational, and aesthetic— properties of the whole can be revealed to
us in experience even if we cannot precisely locate the boundary between what is old and what is
new. For example, after it was restored, we can still perceive Michelangelo’s Pietà to be a magnificent
Renaissance sculpture representing the Madonna with Christ, even if this characterization
does not apply ( any longer) to some of its parts. ( This response can be reformulated easily to avoid
the assumption that new parts are parts: just replace “ new part” with “ pseudo- part”.)
In sum, an integral restoration may make an appropriate experience of parts of a work more
difficult, but it need not prevent us from having an appropriate experience of the work as a whole,
that is, an experience revealing its stylistic, representational, and aesthetic properties.
What is more, an integral restoration is more likely than a purist restoration to enable an experience
that approximates the experience intended by the artist. In other words, an integral restoration
is more likely to return the intended perceptual and aesthetic properties of the work, for the
simple reason that it allows us to replace lost or damaged parts with indistinguishable new parts
( if you like, pseudo- parts). As Catherine Elgin put it, these new parts are “ artificial substitutes designed
to reenable damaged works to perform their aesthetic functions” ( Elgin 1997, 101). In the
case of Michelangelo’s Pietà, these substitutes have returned harmony, splendor, and wholeness—
in short, classical beauty— t o the sculpture, something that would have been very hard to achieve
if a purist approach had been adopted.
Considerations of this sort have made a number of philosophers conclude that integral restoration
is permissible, and even preferable, in some cases ( for example, Wreen 1985, Janowski 2006,
De Clercq 2013, Hulatt 2016, Lamarque 2016). The cases where purist restoration is considered
Rafael
De Clercq
456
preferable typically are cases where one is not confident enough to have the knowledge, skills,
or techniques required for a proper integral restoration, or where the dominant concern is preservation
rather than restoration. For example, preservation is naturally the dominant concern
in the case of archeological or pre- h istorical objects that are valued primarily for what they can
reveal about a past that is very distant from us ( for more on the restoration of such objects, see
Hulatt 2016).
2 Metaphysical Issues
2.1 Are Paintings and Sculptures Incorruptible?
Conservation efforts would not be called for if paintings and sculptures were not subject to deterioration.
But they are, because they— a t least paintings and carved sculptures— a re concrete
objects constituted by matter that makes them vulnerable to all sorts of destructive forces. Still,
some philosophers have argued that paintings and sculptures have perceptual and aesthetic qualities
that do not change as a result of deterioration or restoration. For example, Richard Wollheim
has stated that “ asked the color of Bacchus’ cloak in Titian’s Bacchus and Ariadne we should answer
‘ Crimson’, and this would be the correct answer to give alike when the painting was freshly
painted, when discolored varnish and dirt had turned the relevant part of the canvas brown, and
now that it has been cleaned” ( Wollheim 1980, 182– 183). As a consequence, Wollheim calls works
of art, including paintings, “ incorruptible” ( Ibid.). Of course, this goes against our impression that
deterioration and restoration bring about perceptible changes. However, according to Wollheim
and others ( Savile 1993, Budd 2002, and Lamarque 2010), these changes merely concern perceptual
and aesthetic properties that the work appears to have at a given time. In other words, it does
not concern the work’s true or timeless properties.
Not everyone shares the linguistic intuitions invoked by Wollheim to support the view that
works of art are incorruptible ( for example, Rohrbaugh 2003 and Zangwill 2007 do not). Moreover,
it seems that some of our less contentious intuitions about the permanent properties of works
of art can be accounted for without postulating invisible or timeless perceptual and aesthetic properties
over and above the visible and t ime- bound ones. For example, the intuition that the artistic
value of a work of art does not change over time— w hat was once a masterpiece will always be a
masterpiece— can be accounted for by equating the artistic value of a work with its aesthetic value
around the time of completion ( De Clercq 2013).
2.2 Do Paintings and Sculptures Survive Deterioration and Restoration?
Another metaphysical question raised by cases of deterioration and restoration does not concern
qualitative change— change of properties— but substantial change: do paintings and sculptures
survive the changes brought about by deterioration and restoration? The answer to this question
depends on what one takes paintings and sculptures to be. As said, they are generally taken to
be concrete objects, occupying a particular place at any given time. More specifically, paintings
and carved sculptures are generally taken to be concrete artifacts. However, they may not be like
ordinary concrete artifacts such as ( token) cars and ( token) coffee machines. First of all, paintings
and carved sculptures are not able to survive a complete replacement of their parts, while at least
some philosophers believe that ordinary artifacts can survive such a replacement ( De Clercq 2013,
271– 272). Second, paintings and carved sculptures may not be able to undergo the replacement
of even a single part, but surely a ( token) car or a ( token) coffee machine can have at least one of
its parts replaced. The second hypothesis, if true, could explain why the first hypothesis is true.
However, the first hypothesis could easily be true while the second hypothesis is false.
Conservation and Restoration
457
As we have seen, several philosophers ( Elgin and Sagoff, among others) believe that the second
hypothesis is true; that is, they believe that a work of art cannot undergo part replacement, at
least once the artist responsible for the work has passed away. If they are right, then the question
immediately arises why works of art are different from ordinary artifacts in this respect. One possible
answer is that works of art are parts arranged in a certain way, for example, painting- wise or
sculpture- w ise. Strange as this answer may seem, it is possible to explain it as bound up with one
of the most common ideas regarding the function of art: the idea that art has an aesthetic function
( De Clercq 2020). Moreover, the answer can be found in works by contemporary philosophers.
According to Jerrold Levinson, for example, a sculpture is “ is a hunk of material configured in
a certain way and governed or structured by a certain intention in the making, namely, the intention
that it be regarded-as-a-work-of-art” (Levinson 1988, 720; see Levinson 1996, 134, for a
generalization of this view).
The answer that artworks are parts arranged in a certain way implies that artworks do not
survive deterioration and restoration, at least not if these result in changes of parts. This may
strike one as an absurd consequence. Artworks, it seems, do not stop existing as soon as they lose
one part. If they did, then how could we ever appreciate them for the marks that time has left on
them, that is, for their age value? As Carolyn Korsmeyer observes, “[t]o have age value an object
has to be old” ( 2019, 84; see also Ibid., 197). However, when an artwork loses one of its parts, the
remaining parts obviously still have the same age value, and a proponent of the artworks- as- parts
view could say that it is these parts that we should now identify the artwork with. In other words,
he or she could say that a painting or sculpture is different parts at different times, somewhat like
the President of the United States is a distinct person at different times. Note that such a response
would identify a sculpture such as Michelangelo’s Pietà with the material occupants of a role rather
than with the role itself ( in contrast with Oddie 2016, who regards at least non- a rt museum objects
as roles). In any case, as long as there is sufficient overlap between the original parts and the
current parts, it seems that there is sufficient reason to attribute age value to the work that is now
on display.
2.3 Why Do These Metaphysical Questions Matter?
At this point, one may start to wonder why these metaphysical questions concerning qualitative and
substantial change are worth addressing at all. They may seem to be unconnected to the practice
of conservation. In fact, they are not. First of all, if one believes, as Wollheim and Savile do, that
paintings and sculptures have unalterable perceptual and aesthetic properties, then one is likely to
take restoration to reveal these properties, not to return them ( since the properties were never lost).
Incidentally, this is also the terminology used in some conservation charters. For example, the
Venice Charter for the conservation of monuments and sites says that the aim of restoration “ is to
preserve and reveal the aesthetic and historic value of the monument” ( https:// www.icomos.org/
charters/ venice_e.pdf, accessed on 02/ 05/ 2019). However, the difference between “ revealing”
and “ returning” properties is neither purely terminological nor purely theoretical. It may have
important practical consequences, because if the aim of restoration is to return properties, then
there can be more than one successful restoration. After all, different ( i.e., mutually exclusive) sets
of properties can be returned to a work of art; for example, the set of properties it possessed around
completion time, or ten years later, or 20 years later. However, only one set of properties can be
revealed: the set of properties that the work possesses. ( Of course, different subsets of this set could
be revealed, but that would not introduce the degree of variation that the alternative view allows
for.) In sum, different states of a work can serve as a reference for returning properties; only one
state can serve as a reference for revealing properties. Moreover, the latter is likely to be identified
with the original state of the work. For example, Anthony Savile has suggested that the properties
Rafael
De Clercq
458
timelessly possessed by a work usually are “ fixed” around the time the work is completed ( Savile
1993, 471). In a similar vein, Yuriko Saito has argued that the original state of a work has a special
status, because it shows the artist’s creative activity in its “ integrity” ( Saito 1985, 148). Since it has
been argued that there are serious risks ( for example, excessive cleaning) attached to the assumption
that works of art ought to be restored to their original state, the metaphysical question of
whether restoration reveals or returns properties obviously is of some practical importance.
Another way in which the metaphysical questions bear on practical issues is by justifying some of
the ethical norms that are supposed to guide conservation. For example, if it is true that paintings
and carved sculptures cannot undergo part replacement— a metaphysical a ssumption— t hen this may
help to justify the widely accepted norm of minimal intervention. More specifically, if part replacement
is impossible, then the removal of any part whatsoever brings the work closer to destruction, which
obviously is undesirable from the point of view of conservation. Hence, restorers should take great
care not to remove parts unnecessarily, which means that their intervention should be minimal.
It is easy to state the norm of minimal intervention, but, like that other famous principle of
parsimony, Occam’s razor, it is less easy to determine what it implies. For example, if the norm
prohibits interventions that go beyond what is necessary, then the question immediately arises:
necessary for what? One cannot simply answer, “ for achieving the goal of restoration”. Although
it may be possible to give a very general characterization of that goal ( as in Section 1.1), it can be
more or less ambitious in a particular case ( partial or full restoration?), and also, as we have just
seen, involve reference to a variety of former states of the work ( that is, if one conceives of restoration
as returning rather than revealing properties). Hence, it seems that a more informative
statement of the norm of minimal intervention would be this: “ the restorer should not make more
changes than are necessary to achieve the goal of restoration, where that goal has been specified
in terms of which properties are to be returned by the intervention”.
The foregoing statement also brings out the limits of a philosophical inquiry into the conservation
of paintings, sculptures, and other works of art. Although such an inquiry can prevent us
from basing our decisions on logical fallacies and mistaken theoretical assumptions, it cannot tell
us exactly how to specify the goal of restoration in a particular case. It cannot even tell us whether
restoration is called for at all. Making such decisions about whether, and how, a particular work
ought to be restored inevitably involves weighing a variety of considerations. For example, do we
value the work primarily for historical reasons or ( also) because it represents an exceptional artistic
achievement? How certain are we about the artist’s intentions? Would restoration significantly
rejuvenate the work, and if so, how much value do we place on the aged appearance— the socalled
“ age value”— o f the work? When was the work in its best condition from a purely aesthetic
point of view? What nonaesthetic functions is the work currently expected to perform? And so
on. There is no reason to expect a philosophical inquiry to produce a rule for weighing such considerations,
given the diversity of the values and the works involved.
References
Beck, James and Michael Daley ( 1994) Art Restoration: The Culture, the Business and the Scandal. New York:
W. W. Norton & Co.
Bomford, David ( 2003) ‘ Conservation and Restoration’, in Hugh Brigstocke ( ed.) The Oxford Companion to
Western Art. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Online version accessed on 01/ 05/ 2019.
Bomford, David, Jill Dunkerton and Martin Wyld ( 2009) Conservation of Paintings. Revised and expanded
edition. London: National Gallery Company Limited.
Brandi, Cesare ( 1949) ‘ The Cleaning of Pictures in Relation to Patina, Varnish, and Glazes’, The Burlington
Magazine 91:556, 183–188.
Budd, Malcolm ( 2002) The Aesthetic Appreciation of Nature: Essays on the Aesthetics of Nature. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Conservation
and Restoration
459
De Clercq, Rafael ( 2013) ‘ The Metaphysics of Art Restoration’, British Journal of Aesthetics 53:3, 261–275.
De Clercq, Rafael ( 2020) ‘ The Historical Ontology of Art’, Philosophical Quarterly 70:279, 268–281.
Elgin, Catherine Z. ( 1997) Between the Absolute and the Arbitrary. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Gombrich, Ernst H. ( 2002[1960]) Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial Representation. London
and New York: Phaidon Press.
Gombrich, Ernst H. ( 1962) ‘ Dark Varnishes: Variations on a Theme from Pliny’, The Burlington Magazine,
104:707, 51–55.
Hulatt, Owen ( 2016) ‘ On a Naqadan Vessel— O ur Aesthetic Response to and Restoration of Prehistoric
Artifacts’, British Journal of Aesthetics 56:3, 265–279.
Janowski, James ( 2006) ‘ The Moral Case for Restoring Artworks’, in Elaine A. King and Gail Levin ( eds.)
Ethics and the Visual Arts. New York: Allworth Press, 1 43– 154.
Korsmeyer, Carolyn ( 2019) Things: In Touch with the Past. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lamarque, Peter ( 2010) Work and Object: Explorations in the Metaphysics of Art. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lamarque, Peter ( 2016) ‘ Reflections on the Ethics and Aesthetics of Restoration and Conservation’, British
Journal of Aesthetics 56:3, 281–299.
Levinson, Jerrold ( 1988) ‘ A Note on Categorical Properties and Contingent Identity’, Journal of Philosophy
85:12, 718–722.
Levinson, Jerrold ( 1996) ‘ The Work of Visual Art’, in Jane Turner ( ed.) The Dictionary of Art. London: Macmillan.
Reprinted in Jerrold Levinson ( 1996) The Pleasures of Aesthetics: Philosophical Essays. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 129–137.
Muñoz-Viñas, Salvador (2005) Contemporary Theory of Conservation.Oxford:ElsevierButterworth-Heinemann.
Oddie, Graham ( 2016) ‘ What Do we See in Museums?’, Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplements 79, 217–240.
Rohrbaugh, Guy ( 2003) ‘ Artworks as Historical Individuals’, European Journal of Philosophy 11:2, 177–205.
Ruskin, John ( 1989[1880]) The Seven Lamps of Architecture. New York: Dover.
Sagoff, Mark ( 1978) ‘ On Restoring and Reproducing Art’, Journal of Philosophy 75:9, 453–470.
Sagoff, Mark ( 2017) ‘ Art and identity: A Reply to Stopford’, British Journal of Aesthetics 57:3, 319–329.
Saito, Yuriko ( 1985) ‘ Why Restore Works of Art?’, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 44:2, 141–151.
Savile, Anthony ( 1993) ‘ The Rationale of Restoration’, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 51:3, 463–474.
Scott, David A. ( 2017) ‘ Art Restoration and Its Contextualization’, Journal of Aesthetic Education 51:2, 82–104.
Scott, David A. ( forthcoming) ‘ Ancient Marbles: Philosophical Reflections on the Restoration of Sculpture’,
Studies in Conservation, 1-19.
van de Wetering, Ernst ( 1989) ‘ The Autonomy of Restoration: Ethical Considerations in Relation to Artistic
Concepts’, in Irving Lavin ( ed.) World Art: Themes of Unity in Diversity. University Park: Pennsylvania
State University Press, 849– 8 53. Reprinted in Nicholas Stanley Price, M. Kirby Talley Jr. and Alessandra
Melucco Vaccaro, eds. ( 1996) Historical and Philosophical Issues in the Conservation of Cultural Heritage. Los
Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 193– 199.
Wollheim, Richard ( 1980) Art and Its Objects. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wreen, Michael ( 1985) ‘ The Restoration and Reproduction of Works of Art’, Dialogue 24:1, 91–100.
Zangwill, Nick ( 2007) Aesthetic Creation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
460
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-53
44
SPACE IS PLACE
Why the Placement of Sculpture Matters
Jason Miller
Ozymandius
I met a traveller from an antique land,
Who s aid— “ Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
Stand in the desert…. Near them, on the sand,
Half sunk a shattered visage lies, whose frown,
And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command,
Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed;
And on the pedestal, these words appear:
My name is Ozymandius, King of Kings;
Look on my Works, ye Mighty, and despair!
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
Of that colossal Wreck, boundless and bare
The lone and level sands stretch far away.”
Percy Bysse Shelley
I begin with this w ell- k nown poem because it captures poetically an insight about sculpture that
has yet to be fully articulated philosophically, namely, that how a work of sculpture is experienced
depends on where it is experienced. In the poem, Shelley introduces the reader to an “ ancient
traveler” who reports bearing witness to what remains of the once towering monument to the late
king, Ozymandius. The description of its “ trunkless legs” and “ shattered visage” h alf- sunken in
outstretched sands conjures a striking contrast of imagery. The fictional setting is at once a distant,
thriving civilization, replete with “ mighty works,” as well as an empty expanse of ruin and decay.
One can just as well imagine Ozymandius in its former glory, upright and intact at the center
of a bustling civic life, inspiring the sense of awe and despair of which its pedestal boasts, as one
can the “ colossal wreck” that now sits in the sand, giving silent testament to nature’s victory over
human hubris. Through the poetic juxtaposition of these radically contrasting visions of the same
object, Shelley vividly illustrates how profoundly one’s perception of a thing like Ozymandius can
be shaped by its surrounding environment.
Philosophically, the attempt to articulate the distinctive features of sculpture has been thin relative
to other arts. The sheer diversity of things claiming the title of “ sculpture,” many of which
push the conceptual boundaries of the art form, frustrates the ontologist’s efforts at definition
and proves equally resistant to efforts to pin down the uniquely aesthetic character of sculpture.
What is the essence of that which takes the form of an amulet, a Sphinx, or tiles laid flat on the
Space Is Place: Why the Placement of Sculpture Matters
461
floor; whose materiality comprises wood, stone, metal, clay, a bundle of string, stretches of fabric,
or lights; which is both permanent and ephemeral; both object and subject ( as in Joseph Beuys’
“ social sculpture”)? More importantly, how do we respond to and evaluate such works as sculpture?
What is the common denominator of appreciation when a work can be experienced in relief or in
the round, indoors or outdoors, in spaces both private and public, on the ground, on a pedestal or
atop a cathedral, at the center of a plaza or removed to a niche or alcove, and so on? How do we
experience sculptural works?
A common suggestion is that sculpture is distinct in the way it occupies what we might call
“ real space.” Whereas a painting might be said to represent space fictionally or imaginatively, a
sculpture occupies physical, t hree- d imensional space. Sculpture might be further distinguished
from other arts that occupy space ( e.g. dance, performance art, and architecture) by the way it is
integrally related to its spatial environment. How “ integrally” related? One influential suggestion,
originating with J.G. Herder ( 2002/ 1778) and variously developed in the writings of Susanne
Langer ( 1953), Herbert Read ( 1958), Robert Vance ( 1995), and others, is that sculpture is uniquely
related to space through tactile or proprioceptive awareness rather than visual perception. A similar
suggestion is that a work of sculpture has a unique capacity to affect or transforms the space
around it. This line of thought emerges from G.W.F. Hegel’s notion that a sculpture “ remain[s]
essentially connected with its surroundings” ( 1974; 720) and is more fully developed by F. David
Martin’s concept of “ enlivened space” ( 1981).
Oddly, however, the notion of “ real space” to which sculpture is uniquely related, and which
grounds the aesthetic distinctness of sculpture in either case, is discussed almost exclusively as
an abstraction, as though the appreciation of sculpture concerned the experience of spatiality
itself rather than the concrete and particular spatial environment in which a work of sculpture
is situated. For a work of sculpture doesn’t just occupy space in general, it inhabits a specific,
identifiable space—i.e. a place— which of course includes the space of galleries and museums, but
also ( and more importantly) those spaces inscribed by symbolic or functional significance: parks,
boulevards, churches, courthouses, memorial sites, etc. By overlooking the specificity of place, I
argue, such accounts tend not only to minimize the aesthetically distinctive feature of sculpture,
but also to mischaracterize the experience of sculpture as something both uniform and uniformly
positive. The aim of the present essay, then, is to address the way that the placement of sculpture
bears uniquely on the aesthetic appreciation of it.
Shifting attention from abstract space to the particular place of sculpture, I argue, makes for
a more nuanced phenomenology that more accurately reflects the variety and complexity in the
aesthetic experience of sculpture. First, it shows that sculpture is unique in that its relation to
its physical environment is causally reciprocal: a sculpture can profoundly shape the perception of
its surroundings, and yet the place that a sculpture occupies can also profoundly affect how it
is perceived. Further, it follows from this that the experience of sculpture can take a variety of
forms ( both positive and negative), depending on the particular place that a particular work of
sculpture occupies. Finally, the question of placement shows sculpture to be uniquely resistant
to the autonomist’s insistence on the purely aesthetic appreciation of art. Insofar as sculpture
is aesthetically distinctive in its relation to the space of lived experience, questions of the form
“ Does it work here?”, “ Is it a good fit?”, or “ Is it out of place?” concern the way a particular
sculpture relates, not to t hree- dimensionality in general, but to place— that is, to a spatial environment
marked by the various social, cultural, moral, historical, and political norms in which
it is inscribed.
An important upshot of this discussion is that it bears significantly on the present debate concerning
the removal of Confederate monuments in the U.S. While it is not my intention to wade
directly into that controversy here, clarifying the significance of placement in the appreciation
of sculpture in general may help clarify what is at stake in debates concerning the placement of
Jason
Miller
462
Confederate monuments in particular. Thus, in the final section, I focus specifically on the evolving
history and controversy of Monument Avenue in Richmond, Virginia in order to illustrate the
practical implications of this view. First, whether a Confederate monument is placed in a history
museum or at the center of urban life makes a qualitative difference in how it is experienced in
space, aesthetically or otherwise. By the same token, however, the placement of sculpture can
function as an aesthetic strategy to reshape or reclaim a sense of space, as evidenced in the later
addition of African- American figures to Monument Avenue: the Arthur Ashe monument, and,
more recently, Kehinde Wiley’s Confederate counter- monument, Rumors of War.
1 The Space of Sculpture
The quest for a distinct aesthetics of sculpture typically proceeds by distinguishing it from other,
more familiar forms of art. Often, the best that can be said is that sculpture is unlike painting,
architecture, or music in such and such a way. One thing that can be said positively, however, is
that sculpture is special in the way it is spatial. Even amidst widespread disagreement about the
particular sense of spatiality most relevant to the appreciation of sculptural art, the thing that distinguishes
sculpture from other arts is that it doesn’t just represent space, it exists in actual, physical
space. There is a general consensus, as Robert Vance has noted, that “ even if some sculptures generate
illusory or fictional spaces, what counts for sculpture is occupancy of real space” ( 1995; 217).
What makes the appreciation of Michelangelo’s Pieta akin to that of Claes Oldenburg’s inflatable
hamburger? Both are integrally related to their spatial environment.
Given sculpture’s distinctive relation to real space, it makes sense that many theorists emphasize
the tactile quality of sculpture in distinguishing it from other arts. Sculpture connects the body
with the surrounding spatial environment in a way that neither visual nor auditory arts can. Even
with respect to arts that make use of three- dimensional space in various ways ( e.g. performing
arts, architecture), sculpture stands alone in its inviting us to know its form through touch. Hence,
Herbert Read’s suggestion ( borrowing a distinction from William James’ psychology) that sculpture
is “ primarily an art of ‘ touch- space’ rather than ‘ sight- space’” ( 1956; 48) is compelling, if only
because sculpture comes closest to any other art to giving an affirmative answer to the Molynaux
question: one might know the “ look” of sculpture solely through the sense of touch.
There are, however, reasons to be skeptical of touch- c entric explanations. The question is not
whether touch is uniquely involved in sculpture, but whether it is the primary vehicle of perceptual
transmission. It’s not clear that it is, or even that touch is even necessary to fully appreciate
sculpture. Often, sculpture can’t ( or at least shouldn’t) be touched. Does this make appreciation
impossible? Even with the qualified view that in such cases the visual substitutes the haptic, so as
“ to make tactual space visible,” as Susanne Langer puts it ( 1953; 90), it is not clear that the experience
of sculpture consists solely, or even primarily, in imaginatively touching it. Responding
to Herder, Rachel Zuckert points out that for most sculptures, a darting visual, cognitive apprehension
of the f orm— for example, to recognize that it represents a human b eing— seems crucial
for our appreciation ( 2009; 290). Others deny the primacy of touch altogether. Rhys Carpenter
argues, for example, that sculpture is “ made for the eyes to contemplate and not for the fingers to
feel. ( 1960; 34)
Touch is certainly a distinct phenomenological feature of sculpture. But it is not, in my view,
the most relevant. This is because there is a more basic question concerning the sculpture’s relation
to space which has yet to be addressed, but which bears on the role of touch in the experience of
sculpture. That question is: How does sculpture affect the perception of real, three- d imensional
space? What does it mean, in other words, to say, as Hegel does, that sculpture is “ essentially connected
with its surroundings”?
Space Is Place: Why the Placement of Sculpture Matters
463
I’ll return to Hegel’s thought soon enough, as I think there’s more to be excavated from it that
will be helpful to the present discussion. For now, I want to consider the more developed version
of this thought present in F. David Martin’s concept of “ enlivened space.” To be sure, Martin too
is drawn to the seductions of the touch- c entric theory of sculpture. Necessarily, he thinks, a sculpture
“ directly and significantly stimulates our tactile sensation” ( 1979; 14). But this view emerges
from a more basic conception of sculpture’s relation to space, according to which sculpture is
phenomenologically distinct in being both in and of our worlds ( Ibid). Any form of art can be in
our world, “ but only sculpture,” he claims “ is of our world, in the sense of belonging to our world
as spatially present” ( 1981; 66). What distinguishes sculpture from other arts is its relation to real
rather than fictional space, which, notably, he describes in distinctly causal terms: sculpture transforms
space, makes it “ more perceptible and impacting” and thus “ more real” ( Ibid). This, then, is
the essence of sculpture on Martin’s view: it “enlivens” the space around it.
How does one experience “ enlivened space”? Martin offers a variety of phenomenological
descriptions, many formulated in a distinctly Heideggerian vernacular. Central among these is
the idea that sculpture evokes a sense of spatial “ withness” with things ( Ibid.; 134; Cf. also
1979; 12). What does this mean? Here again, the contrast with painting is instructive. Whereas
a painting draws the viewer into a two- d imensional, imaginative space, perceptually dissociated
from the immediate spatial environment, sculpture amplifies and enhances the awareness of real
space. The experience of sculpture affords an unmediated perception of space, allowing us to
come into “ direct contact” with things from which we otherwise distinguish ourselves and our
bodies ( 1981; 77). Sculpture closes the gap, as it were, between the perceiving self and the world
perceived.
This experience, moreover, is described as having a euphoric and edifying effect. To be with
things in the sense that sculpture makes possible is to lose oneself to a sense of “ primordial unity”
with the spatial world ( 1979; 12– 13). Tacking from the descriptive to the normative, Martin claims
that being separated from the thingness of things “injures our sense of being-in-the-world,” a
malady to which sculpture provides the antidote. The experience of sculpture restores a sense of
presence, satisfies the human craving to be fully part of the physical world, and so on. Thus, on
Martin’s account, sculpture has “ a special healing role in our times” in that it makes our presence
in the world “ more sensitive, informed, and explicitly valuable” ( Ibid).
This account is appealing for several reasons. First, there is something to the idea that the signature
aesthetic feature of sculpture consists in its distinctive, causal relation to its spatial surroundings.
Admittedly, Martin’s vivid account of enlivened space as nothing short of aesthetic euphoria
is itself descriptively compelling. Precisely for this reason, however, one should be skeptical. Apart
from the sometimes handwavey elements of this account,1 there is a troublesome tendency to idealize
the aesthetic experience of sculpture as uniformly uplifting and absorbing. Even if sculpture
does enable the kind of ecstatic oneness with space Martin describes, it seems a rare phenomenon
( I, for one, am not sure I’ve experienced such “ withness” with things). More problematic still is
the idea that the aesthetic experience of sculpture is reducible to the experience of enlivened space,
and thus exclusive of other kinds of aesthetic responses. It is one thing to say that certain works of
sculpture can do this, and another to say that they must ( or, conversely, that the creative mandate
of sculpture is to “ bring out spatial withness!” ( 1981; 134)). As Sherri Irvin points out, “ the idealization
of objects or the creation of immersive spaces through sculpture may, in some instances,
distance us from the physical particularity of the world we live in rather than reconcile us to it”
( 2013; 611). There may be any number of reasons a sculpture might fail to produce the kind of
experience Martin describes. A sculptor might aim to produce a sense of alienation or uncanniness,
as might be said, for example, of Damien Hirst’s work involving a dead shark entombed in
a giant vat of formaldehyde. A sculpture might also maintain distance through the use of humor
Jason
Miller
464
or postmodern irony ( does Jeff Koons’ porcelain sculpture of Michael Jackson and his pet monkey
Bubbles create a sense of “withness” with things?). That is not to discount the profound effect such
sculptures may have on their spatial environments. But it does suggest that this effect can take a
variety of forms, and indeed, for a variety of reasons.
2 Placement and the Experience of Sculpture
Martin’s tendency to idealize the experience of sculpture is representative of a broader tendency
to oversimplify and idealize sculptural space. The powerful insight that the aesthetics of sculpture
rests on its distinctive capacity to transform real space only gets us so far if “ real space” refers to
the abstract idea of t hree- d imensionality rather than the particular, concrete spaces that works of
sculpture actually inhabit. If, however, we turn attention to the particular space of sculpture— to
its placement in real s pace— the relation between a work of sculpture and its spatial environment
begins to resemble the more familiar, diverse, and interesting ways that sculpture is actually
experienced.
The discussion of placement, though not wholly absent from the philosophical discussion of
sculpture, is surprisingly sparse and limited in both depth and scope. Martin devotes a mere ten
pages to the question of “ place”2; Read mentions it only briefly and in passing; and in the writings
of Herder, Vance, and Langer, it is ( so far as I can tell) hardly addressed at all. Where the question
of placement is addressed, it is typically restricted to the gallery or museum setting. A particular
work of sculpture is said to be “ out of place” in the narrow sense that it is positioned too low or
high; that it is too large or too small for its space; that it does not allow itself to be seen fully in
the round; etc. On Martin’s account, the question of placement serves to illustrate the broader
distinction he aims to draw between sculpture and painting. “ Most paintings,” he claims, “ are
detachable and moveable from place to place without the inevitable loss of ‘ rightness’ suffered
by most sculptures.” Whereas a sculpture “ belongs ‘ here’ or ‘ there,’” usually “ a painting can be
almost ‘ anywhere’” ( 1981; 194).
Such narrow consideration of the placement of sculpture, however, is precisely what threatens
the aesthetic distinctness of sculpture. As Rob Hopkins argues, a picture can similarly relate to
gallery space in the sense that it can appear cramped or out of place in its spatial environment
( 2003; 10). This comparison dissolves, however, when we take account of the broader range of
spaces that sculptures actually inhabit. In fact, it is the sculpture that can go almost anywhere, in
the sense that it is uniquely versatile with respect to placement. Beyond gallery space, a sculpture
can be placed in a church, temple, palace, office building, plaza, park, garden, cemetery, etc. To
say, then, that a sculpture is a “ good fit” or “ out of place” in its environment is not just a matter
of its relation to space in general; it is a matter of how it relates to these kinds of spaces. Sculpture,
in other words, uniquely occupies place: a particular, identifiable location inscribed by a specific
function or symbolic significance. A sculpture is indeed related to real space in a way that other
arts are not. But this means, more precisely, that sculpture is fundamentally related to the normative
dimensions of place. It is precisely this essential connection with the purposiveness of space
that a phenomenology of sculpture must account for.
Accounting for place thus adds another layer to the complex phenomenology of sculpture.
For, so far, the discussion has assumed that the relation between sculpture and space as causally
one- directional: that sculpture transforms the perception of surrounding space. This assumption
rests on a conception of space as not only abstract, but also passive and inert— a lifeless domain
enlivened by sculpture’s presence. Construed in terms of place, however, it is clear that the space
of sculpture often has a normative shape of its own. The particular shape that it takes can likewise
affect the perception of the sculpture within that space. In this respect, the relation between
sculpture and space is better understood as causally reciprocal. Sculpture can indeed transform how
Space
Is Place: Why the Placement of Sculpture Matters
465
its spatial environment is experienced; but that spatial environment, bound up with the normative
dimensions of place, can also transform the experience of sculpture.
I take it that something like this is going on in Shelley’s Ozymandius. The image of the statue
shapes the perception of its surrounding space ( as the loss or decay of civilization, etc.). But likewise,
the poetic image of an open, empty expanse presents the forlorn figure of Ozymandius as
a symbol of human vanity. A more concrete example of this effect is evident in Richard Serra’s
Tilted Arc, erected in New York City’s Federal Plaza in 1981 and decommissioned eight years
later under a cloud of controversy. At the heart of this infamous debate over the 1 20- ft. expanse
of C or- T en steel in the center of lower Manhattan’s principal government complex is a question
concerning the norms governing the relation between public art and public space. That question
might be framed simply as a matter of how the installation of Tilted Arc affects the space of Federal
Plaza, with proponents alleging that it enhanced the surrounding space and detractors alleging
that it merely disrupted or obstructed it. But here too the causal relation cuts both ways: how
one reads Tilted Arc as a work of sculpture is partly contingent on how one reads Federal Plaza
as a space. So the question might also be framed in terms of the kind of place that Federal Plaza
is taken to be and the bearing this has on the perception of Tilted Arc. As Gregg Horowitz has
incisively argued, public dissent was in no small part shaped by ideological conceptions of what
common spaces— p articularly those designed to symbolize the beneficent functions of federal
government— are or ought to be. Complaints that Tilted Arc failed to enhance the beauty or utility
of the plaza turned on a distorted perception of the space as beautiful or useful. “ The plaza was
held to be beautiful,” writes Horowitz, “ not because it is but because it had to be” ( 1996; 11). The
broader point to be drawn from this, then, is that the perception of the sculpture as aesthetically
out of joint with its surrounding space issues directly from the perception of the surrounding space
as a positive symbol of public good. Whether and to what extent Tilted Arc enlivens the space of
Federal Plaza has just as much to do with the nature ( or perceived nature) of place as it does the
nature of the sculpture itself.
3 Sculpture as “ Essentially Connected” with Place
To address more fully the question of how the placement of sculpture affects the experience of it,
it will be useful to return to Hegel’s promising suggestion that sculpture is “ essentially connected”
with is environment.
Famously, Hegel characterizes s culpture— particularly the figurative sculptures of Ancient
Greece— a s the pinnacle of art’s achievement. Like many of his contemporaries, Hegel understands
art as one of the primary modes of human s elf- understanding. We need not examine all the
philosophical assumptions behind this view to appreciate the claim that the beauty of sculpture
was for the ancient Greeks much more than a form of art: it embodied the divine in human form.
As such, the beauty of sculpture is akin to religion or mythology. It forms the highest expression
of what Hegel calls Greek Sittlichkeit, or “ ethical life,” the shared cultural awareness that gives
normative grounding to the communal lives of ancient Greeks.3
Nor are we committed to wholesale b uy- i n of Hegel’s admittedly idealized and culturally homogenous
notion of antiquity to appreciate the sense in which sculpture is essentially connected
with a distinctly social environment. As Hegel goes on to explain, the places that Greek sculpture
occupy are places that symbolize shared sources of value and meaning, such as “ temples and
churches” ( 1979; 702) as well as public sites such as “ halls, staircases, gardens, public squares, gates,
single columns, triumphal arches, etc.” ( Ibid). Sculpture, in other words, is essentially connected
with place.
Adapting Martin’s signature distinction, we might say that the sculptures of Myron and Praxiteles
are of the shared space of the polis. They are fundamentally bound up with the socio- cultural
Jason Miller
466
significance of their spaces; so much so, in fact, that for Hegel it is crucial that sculpture be aesthetically
responsive to its environment:
A sculptor should not first complete his work and only afterwards look around to see whither
it is to be taken: on the contrary, his very conception of the work must be connected with
specific external surroundings and their spatial form and their locality.
(Ibid)
Similarly, we might say that how a sculpture relates aesthetically to space has to do with the kind
of space it is ( or is supposed to be). A sculpture can, of course, profoundly impact and enhance the
experience of space. But insofar as sculpture is experienced in relation to a particular place, the
socially normative dimension of place can also profoundly impact the experience of sculpture. For
Hegel, then, sculpture is “ essentially connected with its surroundings” in the more robust sense
of standing in causally reciprocal relation with its spatial environment. Sculpture doesn’t just act
on space; it interacts with place.
4 Placement and Displacement: The Confederate Monument Debate
A significant consequence of the account I’ve sketched so far is that it disrupts the myth of a purely
aesthetic phenomenology of sculpture. Being “ essentially connected” to its environment, it is
impossible to detach the perception of sculpture from the broader normative dimensions of place.
Recognizing this insight can go some way toward explaining why it matters aesthetically whether
a sculpture is experienced, for example, in a museum or at a traffic intersection.
Take, for example, just one of the six Confederate statues situated along historic Monument
Avenue in Richmond, Virginia: that of Robert E. Lee, dismantled in February 2022. Apart from
the stately poise and “ heroic” proportions that underwrite the monument’s aesthetic, it had above
all been its landmarked presence informing the experience of it. Centrally situated along the E ast-
West artery connecting downtown with the residential spaces of the city’s historic Fan district, the
Lee statue quite literally occupied a major part of the urban landscape. Pedestrians and traffic had
to circumnavigate the oversized traffic circle at the center of which sat the towering, bronze likeness
of Lee mounted on horseback. In notable contrast to the space of Civil War museum or other
historically contextualized setting, its site on Monument Avenue long sanctioned its presence,
conferring on it authority over the common space. The Lee monument had been thus “ essentially
connected” with its environment in a way that does not admit of a purely aesthetic experience
of it. To ask, “ Does it fit well with its environment?” or “ Is it out of place”? is to consider how
the monument relates, not to space in general, but to that particular place. And to consider the
placement of the Lee m onument— at a major urban center of the former Confederate c apitol— is
to consider it in its ideological relation to space.
Here, however, the autonomist interjects: “ But this is not aesthetic experience!” For the autonomist
maintains that art is distinct from other kinds of practices and should therefore be valued
independently of those practices. Such non- aesthetic considerations, says the autonomist, threaten
the “ autonomy” of aesthetic appreciation. Even for the moderate autonomist, who readily acknowledges
various historical, cultural, moral, or political as relevant to the experience of art will
nevertheless insist that the aesthetic valuation of art set such consideration aside. The autonomist
is right, of course, that the estimation of an object as a work of art should be independent of the
particular political cause it advances, the price it fetches at market, or other such extrinsic measure
of value. But the autonomist errs in assuming that this separation is always and in every case
possible. The autonomist does not allow that the aesthetic character of a work may be inseparably
bound up with its moral, social, or political character. Mary Devereaux ( 1998) offers a poignant
Space
Is Place: Why the Placement of Sculpture Matters
467
example of this in her discussion of Leni Riefenstahl’s Nazi propaganda film, Triumph of the Will.
Her critique of the autonomist’s view turns on what she calls the “ artistic vision” of the film,
according to which its admittedly praiseworthy cinematic features are inextricably linked to the
glorification of National Socialism. Appreciation of the film’s innovative use of tracking shots, its
musical score, its meticulous editing, etc. thus necessarily entails appreciation of the ideological
vision with which its aesthetic features are essentially connected.
Something similar is going on with respect to the placement of Lee’s statue on Monument
Avenue. Contextualized in the space of a museum or educational setting, it is perhaps possible to
separate historical from aesthetic considerations of a Confederate monument. Placed in the center
of a town square, a courthouse, a public park, or college campus, however, the monument’s aesthetic
features are essentially connected with the ideological narratives of those spaces. One could
say, then, that the “ artistic vision” of the Lee monument renders any purely aesthetic appreciation
of it impossible. This, however, will not satisfy the autonomist. For, as Noël Carrol argues in response
to Deveraux, even if Nazism is an essential feature of Triumph of the Will, it doesn’t follow
that it is necessarily an aesthetic feature ( 2012: 171). Yet there is an important difference between
Riefenstahl’s film and the Lee monument. At issue with the latter is not just the way certain aesthetic
features give the nod to the “ Lost Cause” narrative of the Confederate South, but rather
the way that it was essentially connected with its surroundings as a work of sculpture. At issue here
is not a particular feature of a particular work, but the essential aesthetic feature of any sculpture:
its relation to real space. As with any sculpture, the Lee monument related to its environment in
such a way that its environment affects how it is perceived. It is precisely in virtue of sculpture’s
distinctive interaction with the space of lived experience that the appreciation of sculpture is irreducible
to the purely aesthetic. To appreciate sculpture is to appreciate its interaction with space.
As for the removal of Confederate monuments, here is not the place to defend any particular
position within that debate. I will say, however, that the discussion concerning the placement of
sculpture becomes especially relevant where removing a monument is not an option, or at least
not the only option. In many states ( Virginia included), Confederate monuments have historically
been legally protected from relocation or removal. But, wherever the placement of a monument
is at issue, displacement presents itself as a viable response, both politically and aesthetically. Even if
the Lee monument had remained in place, it could be dis- placed by the presence of other works
that reconfigure the relation between sculpture and space. After all, if a sculpture has the power
to claim space, it also has the power to reclaim it.
This insight offers a powerful coda to the controversial history of Monument Avenue. In
1996— nearly 100 years after the dedication of the Lee monument— saw the addition of a monument
to African- A merican tennis legend, Arthur Ashe. From a strictly visual standpoint, the fairly
conventional, figurative depiction of the Richmond native in his role as athlete, educator, and
humanitarian, the monument itself is not especially noteworthy; some even describe it as awkward
or ugly.4 But its placement on Monument Avenue, just a few blocks west of the Stonewall Jackson
monument, powerfully transforms the surrounding environment. Its presence there displaces that
of its Confederate neighbors. The Arthur Ashe monument works aesthetically in the way that
it activates the space by contesting the symbolic and historical significance of Monument Avenue.
Placed alongside Confederate heroes, the singular figure of a celebrated African- American
assumes a presence that it would not have elsewhere.5 If such questions seem separable from the
aesthetic, it is worth observing that the chief complaint among Confederate heritage groups was
that it “ violates categorical distinction of motif.”6 The Ashe monument was deemed aesthetically
out of place because it did not fit thematically with the others. The aesthetic judgment concerning
the appropriateness of certain monuments is, of course, predicated on a certain historical and
cultural narrative assigned to Monument Avenue. This ideological perception of space, in other
words, gave shape to the perception of the Ashe monument as a “ symbol of a racially factional
Jason Miller
468
commemorative turf invasion, conveniently using a sports arriviste for a pretext.” By the same
logic that aesthetically evaluates the Arthur Ashe monument as a “ turf invasion,” however, it is
also possible to appreciate the placement of the monument as a positive aesthetic feature of the
work. The presence of the Ashe monument activates its environment by reacting to it. It transforms
the surrounding space by displacing the symbolic monopoly held over Monument Avenue.
There is, however, a more recent twist to the spatial narrative of Monument Avenue. Kehinde
Wiley’s Rumors of War bears all the visual queues of a conventional Confederate m onument— the
patinated bronze, the enlarged figure of a man on horseback, the large stone pedestal— e xcept for
one crucial detail: the figure is A frican- A merican. Save for the hoodie, the h igh- t ops, and the
bundle of dreadlocks, Rumors of War looks and feels like it belongs on Monument Avenue. Indeed,
Wiley, the celebrated African- American painter best known for his presidential portrait of Obama,
modeled the statue after Monument Avenue’s J.E.B. Stuart monument, just one block east of the
Lee monument. Though Rumors of War is Wiley’s debut sculptural work, it draws on the same
principle of aesthetic appropriation that informs his paintings, in which hyper- r ealist figures of
contemporary Black youths are juxtaposed against a painterly vocabulary of traditional, Eurocentric
styles and motifs. Much the way Wiley recasts Napoleon on horseback as a young Black man
on canvas, Rumors of War retrofits the aesthetic conventions of the Confederate monument with
an alternative cultural narrative. In both cases, Wiley effectively exposes the myth of aesthetic
autonomy: appropriation reveals the subtle but intractable s ocio- c ultural roots of a seemingly
pure aesthetic style. While the painting does this in the 2D space of its canvas, the Rumors of War
does this in real space— through the aesthetic placement of the work. After its initial unveiling in
New York’s Times Square, where placement ensures maximal public visibility ( Wiley characterizes
it as the “ crossroads of human movement on a global scale”),7 the work is now permanently
installed at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, a few blocks from the intersection of ( the recently
renamed) Arthur Ashe Boulevard and Monument Avenue. The Confederate monuments, though
still present on Monument Avenue, are displaced by the presence of a c ounter- monument, which,
in the artist’s own words, “ allow[s] a moving and constantly changing America to be the context
in which we see this young man riding a massive horse.”8 The placement of Rumors of War will,
no doubt, profoundly transform ( one might even say “ enliven”) the perception of its surroundings.
It would be ironic, then, to suggest that aesthetic appreciation of Wiley’s sculpture concerns
its relation to space in general rather than the more complex dynamic that exists between the
work and the specific, symbolically laden place of Monument Avenue. For in that case, aesthetic
“ autonomy” would imply a narrowly restrictive way of appreciating sculpture.
Notes
1 One otherwise sympathetic reviewer poignantly characterizes Martin’s style of discourse as a “ poetic
phenomenology, in which metaphors often take the place of explication” ( Arnheim 1982; 435).
2 Ch. 11, “Sculpture and Place,” pp. 185–196.
3 According to Hegel, the creation of sculpture for the Greeks then is “ itself a religious activity” and “ for
the people the sight of such works is not contemplation merely but something itself intrinsic to religion
and life” ( 1979: 720).
4 The statue has been widely noted for its somewhat awkward composition. To many, the figure of Ashe,
with both arms raised, holding a tennis racket in his left hand (t he wrong hand) and in his right hand
some books, seems to instill a sense of fear rather than inspiration in the multicultural assortment of
children seated beneath him. The online magazine, Mental Floss, included the Arthur Ashe monument
among its “1 0 Unintentionally Horrifying Statues of Famous People.” Incidentally, many have also
objected to the fact that the sculpture was conceived, proposed, and executed by a white sculptor, Paul
DiPasquale, known to Richmonders for his giant sculpture of a Native American perched atop the entrance
to “ The Diamond” baseball stadium, home of Richmond’s m inor- l eague baseball team formerly
known as “ The Braves.”
Space
Is Place: Why the Placement of Sculpture Matters
469
470
DOI: 10.4324/9781003312727-54
45
TASTE FOR PAINTING AND
SCULPTURE
Stephanie Ross
1 The Nature of Taste
A person’s taste is revealed by the set of things she likes. While gustatory taste encompasses flavors
and presumably much more that underlies and contributes to taste experience – smells, textures,
cultural connections, moral consequences, taste more broadly construed extends to all aesthetic
opportunities.1 These include not only foodstuffs but also everyday items and experiences, the
contents of the natural world, and of course those cultural products that count as art.2 In this
enlarged realm, taste can be defined as informed preference. Key questions include whether some
sort of normativity applies – is there a standard of taste? – and if so, whether and how such taste
is educable.
In the discussion that follows, I will be operating with a neo- Humean account of taste. In
his 1757 essay “Of the Standard of Taste,” Hume argued that we can indeed make objective, evidence- based pronouncements about the arts.3 I believe his approach was revolutionary because he did not attempt to locate value in art by solving the age- old problem of defining beauty.
Instead, he proposed an aesthetic version of Kant’s Copernican Revolution, asking not what
makes for good art but rather what makes for competent judges or critics. Hume’s insight was that
we can identify valuable art by channeling the judgments of true judges or ideal critics. In the
Essay, he characterized these individuals in terms of five characteristics. They possess delicacy of
taste, have extensive practice with the art form(s) about which they hold forth, can summon up
enlightening comparisons to illuminate and justify their claims, are free from prejudice, and can
employ reason or “good
sense” to facilitate formal analysis as well as to judge artistic success in
terms of apparent intentions and means- ends applications. As Hume sums things up,
Strong sense, united to delicate sentiment, improved by practice, perfected by comparison,
and cleared of all prejudice, can alone entitle critics to this valuable character; and the joint
verdict of such, wherever they are to be found, is the true standard of taste and beauty.
(p. 241)
While most of the traits Hume assigns to ideal critics can be fairly easily understood, delicacy of
taste might require a bit of a gloss. I take it Hume has in mind some sort of sensory acuity – the
modality would vary depending on the art in question – that allows its possessor to make fine
discriminations.4 Thus, appreciators possessed of delicacy would be able to discern timbres and
tonalities in a musical performance, brightness and color in a painting, weight and materiality in
Taste for Painting and Sculpture
471
a sculpture.5 Delicacy can be trained to some extent. Consider how aspiring oenophiles benefit from the elaborate vocabulary of wine tasting.6 Similar scaffolding aids our appreciation of var-ious arts. But some degree of innate capacity must be in place for training to take hold. Color blind or tone deaf appreciators will be left behind. One final point. Delicacy seems foundational for the other traits Hume describes. This is especially clear with practice and comparison, each of which mandates thoughtful engagement with specific works. Humean practice involves re-turning repeatedly to a given work to better plumb its depths, while comparison recruits other works – d ifferent pieces by the same artist, similar pieces by other a rtists – t o illuminate aspects of the work in question.
Hume’s approach obviously calls on us to rehabilitate the notion of expertise. While some disparage the Essay claiming it merely entrenches elitism, those more in sympathy with the pro-gram acknowledge the effective contextualization Humean critics can provide for the works they consider. This flows directly from the abilities and experience Hume demands of them. I do think Hume’s account must be amended in various ways in order to suit the present- day artworld. If we leave behind his s entiment- b ased theory which glosses aesthetic appreciation as the pinging of sentiments of approbation or disapprobation, then a competing account of proper appreciation can be put in place, one that recruits all our faculties. In particular, I believe two additional traits, emotional responsiveness and imaginative fluency, must be added to Hume’s portrait of the ideal critic.7 It seems almost a cliché that art and emotion are closely intertwined. Many theorists ascribe emotion a role in the creation of art as well as in its reception.8 Much art also triggers trains of prescribed imagining in appreciators, and many theorists foreground this in their accounts of our interactions with works of art.9
In sum, proper appreciation is a multi- f aceted affair. Perception, understanding, imagination, and emotion all have roles to play. Accordingly, I will follow writers like Noel Carroll and Peter Lamarque who endorse elaborate accounts of critical response/ assessment. In his book On Crit-icism, Carroll claims that the primary task of criticism is reasoned evaluation.10 He goes on to acknowledge six components to critical practice that lead to and support a summary assessment, though there is no requirement that appreciators run through the entire list nor that they visit these stages in order.11 In the section of his book The Philosophy of Literature devoted to critical practice, Peter Lamarque posits a similarly rich account of critical activity.12 I believe his account can be extended beyond the art in question. We can of course be autodidacts, developing and en-larging our taste for art entirely on our own.13 But the Humean model suggests that considerable time and extensive study are required for this task. These are luxuries many of us can’t afford. Therefore, in what follows I will assume that properly situated critics serve as our guides here. In contemplating the development of taste for painting and sculpture, I will emphasize the help that recourse to such critics can offer.
Before moving on to the special demands of the two arts in question, let me note a few fur-ther consequences of the view of critical practice I have set out. For a start, I believe the Humean model gets very little traction unless we hold some sort of intentionalist view about interpreting art. That is, putting any sort of normativity in place seems to require that there was something the artist was trying to do, and that our task as appreciators is to retrieve and assess that offering. There is some latitude here. I want to allow works to be multiply interpretable yet stop short of claiming anything goes. Next, I believe we must construe s o- called Humean true judges or ideal critics as real beings here among us, not ideals we simply try to approximate. I suggest this result follows inevitably from the nature of Humean practice and comparison; these can only be achieved through the gradual accumulation of experience in real time.14 I will continue to refer to the individuals Hume singles out as “ ideal critics,” though I have just denied that they are ideal in the metaphysical sense. Thirdly, the picture I am painting suggests that critics, as well as the ama-teurs they advise, develop their taste gradually. There is a process of maturation, and the resulting
Stephanie Ross
472
developmental arc suggests that the notion of juvenilia applies not only to artists but to critics as
well. They can refine and even vacate former opinions as their backlog of relevant experience
grows. Finally, the problem of identifying the ideal critics among us is a real one. Hume himself
notes “ Though men of delicate taste be rare, they are easily to be distinguished in society, by the
soundness of their understanding and the superiority of their faculties above the rest of mankind”
( p. 243). While critical opinion is dispensed loudly and widely, many of those holding forth do
not meet the expanded criteria we have developed from Hume’s Essay. Hume himself and philosophers
following his lead rely on the Test of Time to patch this problem.15 Only those critics
who properly admire the masterpieces of the past can guide us in appreciating present- d ay work.
Elsewhere, I have acknowledged the problem of projection that undercuts this suggestion.16 Since
those in western artworlds expect that new works will challenge and surpass those that preceded
them, it is not clear that critics tuned in to the latter are reliable guides to the art of their time.
While this is not the place to spell out a full answer to this problem, I would say that all of us can,
by carefully sampling the critical voices around us, find bona fide critics whose taste we share.
They are the individuals who can best guide us in shaping and enlarging our own taste.
I have been sketching a neo- Humean account of taste in order to suggest that the development
of taste for a given art, school, genre, work, or artist often proceeds with the aid of critical advice.
However one fills out this story, further questions arise concerning the routes along which any
given individual’s taste can be expanded or altered. Given where we are now, in what direction
can our current preferences and prejudices shift? Anna Ribeiro addresses this issue in her paper
“ Aesthetic Luck,” indicating the contingencies involved in the works and arts to which we are
initially exposed.17 This of course affects the possible trajectory of our taste, as our backlog of
aesthetic experience at any given time determines the comparison class against which newly introduced
works are measured. Still there remains, at base, a deep mystery about just what things we
can come to like and why our preferences evolve in this manner.18 I have found it helpful to consider
an analogy with friendship here. The goal is to model changes in aesthetic taste on changes
in our circle of f riends – the formation of new friendships, the dimming or dropping of older ones.
Questions about what new friendships we can form turn on receptivity and opportunity.
While some friends are tied to us by a web of mutual acquaintances, others are outliers, singletons
in terms of our overall network. Sometimes current friends introduce us to new people to whom
we take an immediate liking. Other individuals “ grow on us” more slowly as aspects of their personality
or awareness of their values and interests gradually emerge. People often remark on the
ease of rekindling longstanding friendships. They speak of feeling as if no intervening time has
passed. But we also form friendships that we later come to regret. We cool to some friends gradually,
becoming more distant as shared interests wane, but friendships can also end precipitously
if a particular act or perhaps a newly announced affiliation strikes us as unacceptable. I suggest
that each of these possibilities has a counterpart in our relations to art. We come to admire some
works because they are similar to others we already enjoy, but on occasion new and startling works
can win us over immediately, an aesthetic version of the coup de foudre that enlivens the realm of
romance. Our earlier aesthetic enthusiasms can wane as new artworld acquaintances come to the
fore. I don’t know that we ever explicitly regret past affiliations here, but recent theoretical interest
in linkage between the aesthetic and the ethical realms suggests some possible grounds for sudden
changes in aesthetic taste. I hope the many tendrils of this analogy will motivate the discussion
that follows of developing our taste for painting and sculpture.
2 Painting and Sculpture: Distinct Arts with Distinct Appreciative Challenges
In order to track the development of our taste for painting and sculpture, we must first set out the
appreciative demands of each of these arts. There are significant differences that flow from the fact
Taste for Painting and Sculpture
473
that painting is essentially a two- dimensional art, while sculpture is by definition an art of three- dimensions. That is, paintings are ontologically characterized as a set of marks on a surface. The
marks must be left by some from a specified set objects and materials – thus we distinguish paintings from charcoal sketches, pastels, pen, and ink drawings, and more as these count as different
media. I was tempted to demand that the marks inhabit a plane surface. And most characteristically in the present day, we think of easel painting. However, in the past painters created frescoes
on walls, domes, and other architectural surfaces and structures. And of course we acknowledge
cave paintings from prehistoric times. Sol Lewitt’s wall paintings return us to these origins in thought- provoking ways. The notion that the stark white marble statues we now associate with
ancient Greece were once polychromed indicates another loci for marked and decorated surfaces.
In the latter case, I would rule we have painted statues rather than a painting; I would not similarly
dismiss, say, a trompe l’oeil vista on a wall in ancient Pompeii. Though not portable, this definitely
strikes me as an instance of painting. In his book The Art of Sculpture, Herbert Read reminds us
that sculpture, too, originated as architectural adornment. He proposes that the emancipation of
this art proceeded first through the fashioning of small amulets, only later achieving the scale we
associate with free- standing pieces.
Let me concede that there are borderline cases that complicate the distinction I am trying to
draw. I have in mind examples of paintings that engage in flirtation with the third dimension.
These include Anselm Kiefer’s Burning Rods with its thick accretion of paint with embedded
lead, straw, porcelain, and iron, Robert Raushchenberg’s Bed, a painted bed, sheet, and quilt, and
other of his so- called combines that affix objects of varying size to the painted surface of a canvas,
Frank Stella’s Indian Bird series comprising brightly painted pieces of aluminum that overlap and
curl out into space. Nonetheless, we can still maintain an intuitive painting/sculpture distinction.
If we take as our starting point a basic contrast between two- and three- dimensional works, then
a question immediately arises about proper appreciation: how should we take in instances of each
art? An Acquaintance Principle prevails for most aestheticians. It demands that for the plastic arts
of painting and sculpture, we must be physically in the presence of works to understand, assess,
and appreciate them. Thus, we must stand in front of paintings and we must be able to circumambulate at least some sculptures. The Acquaintance Principle rules out the possibility of vicarious
encounters of various sorts
– those facilitated by testimony or delivered through reproductive
media. I will return to these possibilities in a moment. But for now, consider some further consequences of our initial statement of the dimensional difference separating these arts. The requirement that we have direct perceptual acquaintance with the works we come to know still leaves
open a considerable degree of freedom. I will turn my attention to painting then see how many of
the conclusions drawn for this art hold for sculpture as well.
How close should – must
– I stand to a painting? For each work, is there some ideal or optimal
viewing point? Surely this will vary with the scale of the work, the visual acuity of the viewer,
the circumstances of display. Most paintings are such that viewers can position themselves to take
them in in a single glance but then zoom in to savor certain segments, examine specific details.
Interestingly, Michael Baxandall takes up this point early in his book Patterns of Intention. He notes
that
When addressing a picture, we get a first general sense of the whole very quickly, but this is
imprecise, and, since vision is clearest and sharpest on the foveal axis of vision, we move the
eye over the picture, scanning it with a succession of rapid visual fixations.19
Cognitive scientists contributing to the field of neuroaesthetics could certainly specify some of
the neural goings- on that underpin such scanning activity. I don’t want to get mired in details at
the sub- personal level. But I do think that toggling between overall and zoomed- in views is an
Stephanie Ross
474
important part of our appreciative repertoire, especially for representational painting. Consider
William Frith’s Paddington Station, a work disparaged as otiose by Clive Bell precisely because
it is representational and in fact highly anecdotal. Those of us encountering this piece might first
acknowledge the overall setting, an immense barrel- vaulted space replete with incident, then step
forward to interpret the many human dramas unfolding. Individual viewers’ patterns of attention
might vary depending on which of the many foreground anecdotes they found most appealing.
Bell grudgingly admitted the work had several nicely painted passages but wouldn’t extend/allow
it the honorific “work
of art.”
Some paintings – I have in mind anamorphic works that reveal portions of their content only
when viewed from extreme oblique angles – do come with specific station points that are key
to proper appreciation. Hans Holbein’s The Ambassadors might be one of the most frequently
cited examples. Such guidance could prove helpful in other cases as well. Marks on the floor of
the Sistine Chapel or interiors similarly adorned with trompe l’oeil features or illusionistic scenes
overhead could show visitors where to stand to best take in those depictions. Arthur Danto cites
the example of a marble disk on the floor of St. Ignatius in Rome indicating the proper place from
which to view Andrea Pozzo’s fresco dramatizing the apotheosis of the saint.20 But advice of this
sort is not always called for. Who is to say where I should plant myself to view one of Monet’s
huge Waterlily canvases? In fact one of the joys with such pieces is to move around and vary the
taking. Viewed from far off, the images on these immense canvases do coalesce into floating pads
and blooms. From closer up, one can admire portions of the canvas as abstract presentations.
Even with wholly abstract works, for example, paintings by Franz Kline, Jackson Pollock, Mark
Rothko, Morris Louis, viewers are likely to engage in a counterpoint between all- over summary
viewing and close- up attention to detail, though of course detail here would involve notice of
formal patterns, color relationships, brushstrokes, and other textures rather than the interpretation
of representational content.
Richard Wollheim theorizes the duality under discussion here in the section of his book Painting as an Art that introduces the notion of twofoldness. Starting from the assumption that painters
create “in order to produce a certain experience in the mind of the spectator,” Wollheim focuses
in on the characteristics of this experience. He insists that it must track the intention of the artist – the “desires, thoughts, beliefs, experiences, emotions commitments that motivate the artist
to paint as he does” – and that this experience must come about through looking at the picture
( p. 44). This is the Acquaintance Principle at work. After specifying three key perceptual activities
that spectators recruit in looking at paintings – seeing- in, expressive perception, and the capacity
for visual delight – Wollheim posits a pictorial feature he calls twofoldness (p
p. 45,46). He defines
this as an ability to simultaneously see a picture as marks on a surface AND as the representation
of something standing in front of or receding behind that surface ( p. 46). So for Wollheim, in
viewing a Cezanne still life I both see red, green, brown, and yellow patterns on a canvas and
a bowl of apples sitting on a table. Wollheim insists that these are inseparable aspects of a single
experience, not separate simultaneous experiences nor two separate alternating experiences (46).
This is a metaphysical claim about the components of our viewing experience. Presumably, it
can only be confirmed through query and introspective report. I am myself inclined to think we
can toggle back and forth between the two aspects at will, somewhat as we can choose which
creature to foreground in Wittgenstein’s duck- rabbit figure. Our recent discussion of choosing
different station points for viewing a painting hung on a museum wall certainly suggests that we
can choose viewing conditions that suppress one of the components of Wollheimian twofoldness
while enhancing the other. I want to insist on this willful aspect of foregrounding as an aspect
of our visual experience and not worry about whether it remains inextricably linked to the companion aspect that Wollheim posits. Overall, I think our visual experience of pondering a painting, an experience we can isolate and examine via introspection, remains the same whatever the
Taste for Painting and Sculpture
475
underlying metaphysics. That is, whether we’re attending to one of two inseparable aspects of a single experience or toggling between components that can in fact be pried apart, what we note and attend to seems the same. More important for our purposes, taste for painting – for a particu-lar work, for the oeuvre of a particular artist, for the achievements of a particular s chool – can be enhanced when critics guide us by pointing out what can be savored in either or both of these two aspects. “N ote how the receding diagonals of the road lead your eye into the depths of the land-scape.” “ Consider how the pronounced brushwork reinforces the overwrought emotional tone of the scene.” “ Attend to the black mass in the foreground that announces itself immediately,” … Through comments like these, discerning critics can school our eyes both to qualities of the marks on the surface and to aspects of the scene ( or formal arrangement, for abstract works) that they depict. In doing so, they can help us understand what the artist was attempting, what he or she has in fact accomplished, and how this relates to the work of others, whether drawing on predecessors and contemporaries or influencing later artists.
Does twofoldness apply as well to sculpture? Certainly, we can focus on the materials from which a work has been carved or assembled as well as to the t hree- d imensional volume it occupies. That is, we can notice what Aristotle would label the work’s material and formal causes – the mat-ter or medium from which a work was created as well as the patterns it traces in t hree- d imensional space. This would seem to be the counterpart to attending to the marks on the surface of a canvas as marks rather than as signifiers. We can then also consider how a given sculpture “ reads” as a human torso, a rearing horse, etc. Sometimes these two factors intertwine in our appreciation. Peter Kivy, in Sound and Semblance, noted that in assessing sculpture we should take into account the recalcitrance of the medium.21 That an artist can cause cold marble to represent warm flesh is remarkable. That a given portrait bust by Bernini can present to us warm flesh, intricate lace, wiry hair, limpid eyes, stiff fabric, all rendered from one and the same block of marble, is truly wondrous. How far should we attempt to plumb the two- d imensional marks on a surface or the three- dimensional patterns of volume and void presented by specific paintings and sculptures? Knowing that a certain blue pigment was far more costly in Renaissance times than paint of other hues makes its choice for the Virgin’s robe significant. I suspect it does not matter whether the damaged auto body parts from which John Chamberlain assembles his sculptures come from a Ford Fiesta, a Jaguar XKE, or a Dodge Ram Pickup. More immediate aesthetic p roperties – s ize, shape, surface finish, and the like – a re surely more important here.
The question of proper station point does, however, become more vexed with the art of sculp-ture. Figures contained within an architectural s etting – f or example, lining the portals at Char-tres or inhabiting a niche in St. Peter’ s – l ook out at us and invite a gaze from directly in front of them. With works created and exhibited in the r ound – f ree- s tanding pieces displayed so that appreciators can fully circle t hem – i t isn’t clear whether the view from some one spot has priority. Encountering, say, a standing nude, it might matter whether the figure is presented in a full frontal posture – consider hieratical Egyptian pharaohs or archaic Greek nudes – or is instead more sinuous, inscribing a Gothic S curve or oriented in one direction while simultaneously looking away from that implied line of travel. In such cases, are we to align ourselves with the orientation of the body or the direction of the gaze? There is surely not one correct answer here. For example, a work as expressive and dramatic as Bernini’s Ecstasy of St. Teresa in Rome invites viewers to position them-selves orthogonal to the line uniting swooning nun and visiting angel. This suggestion is reinforced by the flanking columns and backing golden rays, which with other architectural details form the containing shrine or aedicule. Contrast what is involved in savoring one of Henry Moore’s more staid and highly abstract reclining nudes. There does not seem to be a privileged station point for taking in these figures. Instead, they generate a symphony of changing configurations when cir-cumambulating viewers register positive and negative space, projecting and receding masses, pierced and intact volumes, occluded and foregrounded features.22 While the sculptures comprising David
Stephanie Ross
476
Smith’s Cubi series are not explicitly figural, I think they too invite us to circle and take them in from all angles. Especially when exhibited outside at the artist’s Bolton Landing studio, such perusal would guarantee that these spare objects were read against an ever-
changing background scene.
Scale is certainly relevant here as well. Peering at a tiny ivory diptych that tells an entire
Biblical tale is a quite different experience than encountering a sculpture large enough to enter.
Richard Serra’s Joe, for example, is a massive COR-TEN steel spiral, a Nautilus- like chamber that
visitors can penetrate. An online article by the Regional Arts Council introducing St. Louisans
to this piece includes a quote from Serra about the experience of his work: “The perceptual fragmentation, the multiplicity of views, the discontinuity in the process of viewing contribute to the
fact that the installation cannot be reduced to one attainable image.”23 This certainly coheres with
the claims made above about taking in one of Henry Moore’s many Reclining Nudes. Note that
Serra’s infamous piece Tilted Arc generated controversy in part because it broke up the surrounding space that inhabitants of the neighboring federal buildings were accustomed to traverse and
occupy. Tilted Arc seems a case where critical commentary explaining the notion of site specificity and detailing the analogy between the impediments provided by large- scale sculpture and
overweening government might have at least earned the work some grudging admiration, though
its intrusion into the public space would have continued unabated.
Given the suggestions made above about the proper appreciation of both painting and sculpture, return for a moment to the Acquaintance Principle. Are second- hand encounters – through
photographs, videos, descriptions, testimony from acquaintances, friends, or experts – adequate
substitutes for being face-
to- face with the real thing? Given the difference in dimensionality, a
photograph of a painting might seem a more reasonable proxy than a photograph of a sculpture,
especially if the photo is full frontal, in good light, with high-
quality camera and lens.24 A photograph of a sculpture seems less satisfactory as the photographer must privilege one station point
from the 360 degree circuit around the work. As noted above, some figural pieces are oriented
in a way that invites viewing from one specific spot, but this is hardly the norm. And let me note
in passing that the caveats proposed here for experiencing sculpture hold true in spades for the
case of architecture, an art whose instances are not only meant to be entered but are often also
meant to be used for specific functions. Obviously, compromise is necessary. Generations of art
history students have been introduced to masterpieces of painting, sculpture, and architecture on
the basis of photographs, slides, videos, and other such second- hand reproductive media. Never
having been to Italy, I know of countless of these works only second hand. Art history classes,
critical writing, aesthetics presentations, and more have contextualized many of them for me, setting out their place in the history of Western art. Still, were I ever lucky enough to finally make
a pilgrimage and meet some of these icons face to face, I might well decide “Admittedly great,
but not for me.” That is, individual taste is not entirely lock- step and uniform. Within the canon
of admired works, we will inevitably each pick and choose depending on the past experiences
that have shaped our taste today.25 Just as life experiences can add to the set of works we come to
value, we also cull this set as our taste evolves. I may slowly wean myself from my attachment to
works I currently like. In his short memoir in the New Yorker as he confronts a terminal cancer
diagnosis, that magazine’s art critic Peter Schjeldahl cites his method for attempting to alter his
current taste. Faced with works to assess, he notes “I
retain, but suspend, my personal taste to deal
with the panoply of the art I see. I have a trick for doing justice to an uncongenial work: ‘What
would I like about this if I liked it?’ I may come around; I may not. Failing that, I wonder, What
must the people who like this be like? Anthropology.”26 To me, Schjeldahl’s closing declaration
(“Anthropology”) indicates that at some point, variation in taste must be explained by considering
aspects of appreciators rather than traits of the works they take in.
Before turning to some specific cases, I would like to take up one additional factor in the
appreciation of painting and sculpture, namely, the trajectory some theorists posit in setting out
Taste for Painting and Sculpture
477
the history of each art. In his piece “The End of Art,” Arthur Danto proposed a Hegelian overview according to which the history of Western art proceeded with artists becoming ever more
accomplished in capturing the realistic appearance of the external world. According to Danto,
artists who aspired to duplicate the experience of perceiving actual objects sought to substitute
direct perception for “mediating inferences to perceptual reality facilitated by cues” (p. 10). Thus,
he traces the evolution from symbolic and hierarchical representations to those guided by the
rules of linear perspective. Since even the Photorealist painters of the 60s and 70s were unable to
capture one aspect of the real world
– movement – Danto expands his historical account to include the art of film, noting rightly that the very first films captured subjects like surging crowds,
approaching trains, tree limbs moving in the wind ( p. 18). Danto plays with the idea that moving
holograms might be the next step in this sequence, as this would eliminate problems of parallax
leaving palpability as the final frontier. In the end, Danto rejects both this account of art’s history
and another centered on expressiveness to instead focus on a more strictly Hegelian narrative that
sees art turning into philosophy. This allows the move to abstract and conceptual art to count
as a continuation, in fact culmination, of the sequence already proposed. Yet interestingly, in
presenting the first alternative, the one that charts the history of art as a tale of representational
progress, Danto notes that this linear or progressive model “finds
its best examples in painting and
sculpture” (pp. 18. 20).
Danto switches to a Bildungsroman trope to characterize the favored view with which he
closes, but it says something important about the two arts under consideration here that they so
ably fit the progressive narrative. In another of his works, The Transfiguration of the Commonplace,
Danto voices the worry that art reaches an end when its products are indistinguishable from the
real things it seeks to represent. That is, in capturing them perfectly, art works are no longer
simulacra but simply additions to the collection of mere real things. Representational paintings
realistic enough to truly deceive us – the literal meaning of that phrase “ trompe l’oeil” – are endpoints in a progression when the art of painting is under consideration. Turning to sculpture, I
was tempted to say there is no genre equivalent to the still life enshrined in Western painting. But
Danto’s entire philosophical exploration was prompted by musings on such Pop Art icons as Andy
Warhol’s Brillo Boxes and Campbell Soup cans. Here are artworks nearly indistinguishable from
the real-
world counterparts their creator was modeling. Claes Oldenburg’s inflated hamburgers,
electric plugs, and more perhaps serve as ironic insertions into this portion of sculpture’s history.
And some sculptors who take as their subject the human body can count as participants in this progression. Consider the work of George Segal and Duane Hanson, both of whom I believe created hyper- realistic figures by wrapping actual people in plaster, and Ron Mueck, whose resin- based
figures are disturbingly lifelike. As Danto noted about hyperrealistic paintings, Mueck’s figures
lack only the capacity for movement. And perhaps some basic bodily warmth!
I have been riffing on Danto’s idea that both painting and sculpture reach a dead-
end of sorts
when artists become so capable of reproducing the appearance of reality that their creations simply
add to the stock of mere real things. How can art progress beyond this point? Building on Robert
Rauschenberg’s posit of a gap between art and life, Danto suggests that artists turn their attention
to this interval.27 In doing so, they become practitioners of philosophy. Thus, for Danto, contrasting a Brillo Box by Andy Warhol with its counterpart on a supermarket shelf tells us much about
art. And abstract and conceptual works that prompt challenges from scoffing viewers – “I
could do
that!” “A
child could do that!” “A
monkey could do that!” – because they appear to lack artistry
are compellingly glossed by critics who explain how they effectively examine the resources and
limitations of various arts: flatness and color in painting, volume and presence in sculpture, and
so on.
The Hegelian account of the history of Western art that Danto sets out in his essay can certainly be contested. But I think his narrative flags in a compelling way some of the sticking points
Stephanie Ross
478
that appreciators encounter in trying to develop a taste for painting and sculpture. In addition to
preferences for style and subject, the philosophical questions underlying art’s history become urgent
in our era. If the discussion to date has succeeded in highlighting some important attributes
of Western painting and sculpture as these arts have evolved to the present time as well as some
indication of what we should notice about particular w orks – the features we should take in and
the background information we should seek out to properly appreciate them – t his goes some way
to showing how taste for these two plastic arts can be formed. In the closing section, I will set out
a few hard cases and ask how appreciative progress might be achieved.
3 Some Test Cases
As announced at the outset, I have placed my inquiry about appreciating painting and sculpture
in a Humean frame. In asking how taste for these arts can be enhanced, I assume that the most
effective answer incorporates guidance from critics whose taste we share.28 With that idea in place,
let me consider some specific challenges that arise for the arts we are following. I will start with
the art of painting. Inevitably, we will all form different preferences from the vast array that makes
up the history of this art in the West. Some of us will be drawn to portraits, others to landscapes,
some will prefer history paintings, others still lives. While these differences flow in part from our
different experiences in the real world and the world of art, there is also an aspect of deep mystery
about the determination of preference. In all likelihood countless past associations we can no longer
retrieve play a role. That I prefer a wooded landscape with a foreground path receding into a
forest of oaks to a seascape with frigates plying churning waves may have much to do with where
I grew up and the sorts of outdoor adventures I most enjoy. Putting aside such idiosyncratic and
impenetrable factors, there may also be preferences or prejudices we develop in response to what
are clearly art- historical and/ or aesthetic factors.
Humean critics are specially positioned to address these last issues. Their expertise flows from
the accumulation of knowledge flagged by Hume’s practice and comparison criteria as well as the
sensory acuity that travels with their delicacy of taste. When critics draw on their art- historical
knowledge to situate works, flag salient properties, propose interpretations, and more, they further
our understanding and appreciation. Thus, Giotto’s earth- b ound figures might seem awkward and
uncouth until his paintings are situated in the ongoing development of linear perspective. The
old envelopes and dead game painted by William Harnett might seem without aesthetic interest
until the goals of 19th- century trompe l’oeil art are explained. The f rieze- like arrays in Poussin’s
many historical and mythological paintings might seem both interchangeable and impenetrable
until the component figures and tales are glossed. Of course some viewers might find themselves
drawn to Poussin’s classical, cool Apollonian style, while others will be more moved by the electric
manner in which, say, Delacroix treats historical subjects. While I don’t think these sorts
of deep- seated preferences can be overcome, critical comment can at least position appreciators
to grant the objective importance of works, artists, movements that they do not find personally
moving or rewarding.
Turning to contemporary works, greater effort may be required to create effective matchmaking.
Appreciators fond of bucolic landscapes might not warm to Cezanne’s many renditions of Mt.
Sainte Victoire or to Monet’s documentation of squat haystacks in different times of the day and
seasons of the year. Explanations of the stylistic choices and innovations of these two artists might
well earn these works greater admiration. Again, the distortions and anatomical inaccuracies of
Picasso’s Demoiselles might seem o ff- p utting. A critic explaining some of the goals behind this
stage of the cubist enterprise might rehabilitate the canvas for some. The idea of simultaneously
presenting incompatible viewpoints on a specific figure shows how cubists were challenging some
of the limitations ascribed to painting since the time of Plato’s screed in the Republic. Comparisons
Taste for Painting and Sculpture
479
with African masks
– a
form of contextualizing that took a considerable hit during the infamous Primitivism exhibit at New York’s Museum of Modern Art in 1984
– attempts to establish a greater cultural resonance for this work.29 One friend has suggested that Les Demoiselles is inviting on its own terms; its arresting shapes and colors and clear figural content draw in viewers even though they remain aware of the inaccuracies and distortions when this painting is evaluated in terms of traditional linear perspective as well as its violation of ensconced (and perhaps objectionable) Western canons of beauty. Perhaps the severe analytical cubist canvases of bottles, guitars, and the like that Picasso, Georges Braques, and Juan Gris painted together in the early 1900s present a tougher case for generating a welcoming embrace. It is hard to read anything in these works, their depiction of volume and depth is hardly standard. Unless one is especially fond of a subdued palette of brown and green, the surface liveliness is not compelling. And it can be disconcerting not being able to find tags of individual style that might separate and individuate the productions of these three different artists. Again, contextualizing these paintings by chronicling the practices and goals of analytical cubism can secure their place in the history of contemporary western painting. And importantly here as elsewhere, there should be room for appreciators to grudgingly acknowledge the importance of a given work while simultaneously noting “not for me.”
Willem De Kooning’s Woman series represents another challenging example of figurative yet off- putting art. While the bared teeth and evident breasts flag these as paintings of female figures,
they seem fierce and aggressive. Moreover, the prevalence of these traits across the series suggests
that the painter himself did not hold women in great esteem.30 If so, then what Tamar Gendler
calls imaginative resistance – our unwillingness to entertain or endorse morally objectionable content – may block admiration of these works. Again, knowing critics can situate these paintings in a historical sequence, showing their affinity to figures in Max Beckman’s expressionist
canvases as well as to entirely abstract pieces that exhibit similar surface texture. A different sort
of resistance comes into play when novices are asked to admire abstract work so seemingly simple
as to entirely lack artistry. Kasimir Malevitch’s black on black canvases, allegedly the first monochromatic pieces in the Western canon, are a case in point. Josef Albers Homage to the Square
series might seem equally bankrupt, though their execution surely calls for draughtsman- like precision. Comparing and contrasting them with Monet’s returns to. country haystacks or to Rouen
Cathedral might at least secure them a place in a narrative presenting the evolution of western art.
The fact that each artist returned repeatedly to a theme or format encourages us to search more
carefully for the differences separating each canvas in the series. I do suspect that our preferences
for abstract art, once we acknowledge the trajectory that leads to its emergence, are prompted. in
part by non- rational and idiosyncratic factors – What palette do I prefer? Do I respond more to
angular or to curvilinear forms? To balanced or to asymmetric compositions? To spare or to busy
canvases? – as by art- historical details that a critic can fill in.
The last point to make in this brief traversal of the development of taste for painting is the reminder that this process involves shedding as well as acquiring enthusiasms. Weaning an appreciator from her taste for Thomas Kinkaide might do as much to advance her taste as putting in place an interest in landscapes by van Ruisdael, Constable, or Cezanne. I am all for the role art plays in promoting fantasy and escapism; artworks allow us to explore imaginary worlds and these can constitute a welcome antidote to the actual realm we inhabit. Still, criticisms can mount of Kinkaide’s repetitive and overly sentimentalized nighttime scenes with warm light emanating from the windows of pristine yet retro stone cottages. In his paper “Personal Taste and Artistic Worth,” Jerrold Levinson notes that even ideal critics need down time from the set of masterpieces they anoint, yet they never lose touch, while visiting lesser works, of the overall ranking where these find their place.
Many of the examples I have offered of sticking points in the appreciation of painting have
parallels with the appreciation of sculpture. Thus, admirers of exemplars from classical Greece – finely
delineated, anatomically accurate nudes carved from smooth white marble – might find it
Stephanie Ross
480
hard to come to terms with the quite different aesthetic properties of Rodin’s figural works. His
hulking Balzac seems looming, unfinished, perhaps even threatening. The changes in treatment
and in scale need to be explained. Though here again, how appreciators respond might in the end
turn on how they align on some sort of Apollonian/ Dionysian continuum we can construct by
gathering sets of opposing aesthetic qualities. Note that a further capacity – the ability to appreciate
figural sculptures with missing parts! – i s required for admiration of ancient Greek sculpture.
The Venus de Milo is armless, the Winged Victory of Samothrace lacks arms, feet, and head, yet
they are universally revered and admired. And in fact there is a famous puzzle case in aesthetics
that asks how a classical marble statue, destroyed by vandals, is best exhibited: as a set of shards
lying on the floor ( they are, after all, what remains of the original); as a total reconstruction of the
original piece ( in order to regain for viewers intended aesthetic experience); or as a restoration
using colored fill to mark places where contemporary additions replace now- lost original material
( allowing appreciators to distinguish what came from the hand of the original artist).31 As with
most thought experiments in philosophy, the point is less to highlight one correct answer than to
point out the presuppositions and values underlying each approach.
Clearly, developing a taste for sculpture requires accommodating differences of scale and style.
Compare and contrast female figures by Alberto Giacometti, Gaston Lachaise, and Henry Moore,
who overlapped during the first third of the 20th century. Giocometti’s women are attenuated,
Lachaise’s inflated, Moore’s “ disassembled.” The work of each artist can be contextualized by
detailing his materials, methods, aims, and influences. Such information can be provided by an
art history or a more narrow history of sculpture course, but it is also something properly situated
critics can set out. Similar caches of information can encourage appreciation of abstract
works, whether the sleek and simple shapes of Jean Arp and. Isamu Noguchi, the more complex
assemblages of David Smith and John Chamberlain, or the intricate creations of Louise Nevelson.
While the labor that went into each of these artist’s pieces remains clear, there are certainly some
sculptors who elicit worries about fraudulence and absent artistry. Duchamp’s readymades go one
step further than Warhol’s soup cans and Brillo Boxes, as Duchamp did not deign to fashion a
simulacrum but simply plucked an object from the everyday world for display. By contrast, Donald
Judd and Carl Andre might seem to be artists who do indeed make or install things yet generate
totalities with no artistic worth. Can a taste for these artists be inculcated?
Since Duchamp’s Fountain may be the sculptural piece most discussed by contemporary aestheticians,
I will allow that his “ prank” raises real and substantial questions about the nature of
art. He can be seen as following Danto’s prediction that art will at some point transmogrify into
its own philosophy. Validating the work of Judd and Andre might take some additional effort. Not
only can Judd’s repeated boxes be assimilated to some of the work painters have produced in series
( recall the previous discussion of Monet’s haystacks and cathedrals and of Albers’ squares), but the
installations of both artists can call attention to a factor overlooked in my discussion of sculpture
to date, namely, the ways sculptural pieces can inhabit and alter an exhibition space. In his book
The Sculptural Imagination, Alex Potts comments on a photo of a famous installation Robert Morris
created for New York’s Green Gallery in 1964. The component pieces effectively command and
divide the containing gallery. Potts remarks that the installation “... transforms the gallery space
into a set on which a viewer/ performer is being invited to carry out his or her routine.”32 Similar
effects can be ascribed to works by Judd and Andre. In inviting visitors to come walk on the grid
of squares he positions in a room, Andre effects connections between the component pieces, the
surrounding space, and the bodily postures and movements of those who enter. Their kinaesthetic
assessment of the situation inevitably includes an acknowledgment of and resistance to the underlying
plates. Thus, the space they share with the installation is inevitably altered by the inclusions
orchestrated by the artist. A limiting case of such installation art might be the lightworks Robert
Irwin, James Turrell, and others have created by altering spaces with scrims and directed artificial
Taste for Painting and Sculpture
481
and natural light.33 If these too count as sculpture, they are works created not from any physical material but from manipulated beams of light. Coming to understand the wider reach and ambi-tions of these works might win over appreciators first inclined to scorn them.
Again paralleling our treatment of painting, the inculcation of taste for sculpture can also in-volve persuading appreciators to forsake less worthy works and artists. There is a genre of highly sentimentalized bronze sculptures of children engaged in activities that harken back to idyllic and retro notions of childhood in A merica – y oung boys with fishing poles and frogs, young girls with kittens, and more. They epitomize the themes that Anthony Savile sets out in his article arguing that sentimentality is always a flaw in works of art.34 He singles out children and domestic pets, the prime subjects of the works just cited, as common objects of sentimentalization. The work of Jeff Koons is perhaps more controversial. Critics are divided on its merits. Koons definitely trades in subjects that fall within Savile’s net. Consider his massive balloon sculpture dogs and rabbits, his topiary ( Chia pet?) terrier, his porcelain renditions of Michael Jackson and his monkey Bubbles. Koons has certainly been rewarded by the art market, as his balloon sculptures have repeatedly broken the records for price paid for work by a living artist, first when a balloon dog sold for $58.4 million, then when a balloon rabbit topped that at $91.9 million. One source says that
Koons’ crucial point is to reject any hidden meaning in his artwork. … He tries to reach a widest possible audience by using familiar objects with sentimental value. He considers it his mission to make the viewer confident of his own judgment and taste.35
The critic Robert Hughes conveys his less sanguine assessment through this vivid p ut- d own: “ He has the slimy assurance, the gross patter about transcendence through art, of a blow- dried Baptist selling swamp acres in Florida.”36
It may well be that we must await the test of time before arriving at a consensus view about the merits of Koons’ work. I hope that the examples offered in this section indicate the bewilderment and on occasion the hostility that can arise when we encounter new works of art. Developing taste requires expanding the set of works we understand and admire, and this can require effort and aid. Painting and sculpture are p re- e minent arts in the West, and nurturing our appreciation for exemplars of these arts is surely one way to enhance life.
Notes
1 For a theory of gustatory taste that proposes six distinct components, see Carolyn Korsmeyer’s book Making Sense of Taste, ( Ithaca, NY: Cornell, 1999). The componential analysis, conducted in the section on the phenomenology of taste in Chapter Three (“ The Science of Taste”) is summarized on p. 98.
2 Allen Carlson has published a series of papers addressing the aesthetic appreciation of the natural world; Yurikio Saito and Thomas Leddy are two authors who have spearheaded the exploration of everyday aesthetics. See for example Yuriko Saito, Everyday Aesthetics ( Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), Thomas Leddy, The Extraordinary in the Ordinary: The Aesthetics of Everyday Life, ( Buffalo, NY: Broadview Press, 2012)
3 David Hume, “ Of the Standard of Taste,” in Essays Moral Political and Literal ed. Eugene F. Miller, ( Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Classics, 1987). In what follows, I will for convenience refer to this piece simply as the Essay, and additional references to the work will be cited parenthetically in the text.
4 It is acknowledged to be the perfection of every sense or faculty, to perceive with exactness its most minute objects and allow nothing to escape its notice and observation. p. 236.
5 It is not so clear what traits delicacy discerns in literary works. I consider literature an outlier among the arts as understanding and appreciation here are not keyed to immediate sensory takings – the look of letters on a page, the sounds of speech.
6 Hume famously illustrates this capacity by recounting an episode from Don Quixote in which Sancho Panza’s kinsmen dispute the flavors and value of a hogshead of wine.
Stephanie Ross
482
Taste
for Painting and Sculpture
483
28 I owe this formulation – of following not just any critic but one whose taste we find congenial – to Alan Goldman. See Aesthetic Value, ( Boulder, CO: Westview, 1995).
29 See Thomas McEvilley’s ringing criticism of that exhibit in his 1984 ArtForum piece “ Doctor Lawyer IndianChief.”https://www.artforum.com/print/previews/198409/on-doctor-lawyer-indian-chief-primitivism-in-20th-century-art-at-the-museum-of-modern-art-in-1984–35322.Oneselectsummaryquote: “ In depressing starkness, ‘ Primitivism’ lays bare the way our cultural institutions relate to foreign cultures, revealing it as an ethnocentric subjectivity inflated to coopt such cultures and their objects into itself.”
30 Though de Kooning insisted that his real subject, here and elsewhere, was “ space and the figure ground relation”!https://www.theartstory.org/artist/de-kooning-willem/.
31 I believe the credit for coming up with this puzzle goes to Mark Sagoff.
32 Alex Potts, The Sculptural Imagination, ( New Haven, NJ: Yale University Press, 2000), p p. 2 40– 241.
33 Along with other artists, Irwin and Turrell were members of the Light and Space movement that origi nated in southern California in the 1960s. See https:// en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/ Light_and_Space.
34 “… sentimentality is always open to criticism. There is always something wrong with it. … There are no situations the proper perception of which demands a sentimental response.” Anthony Savile, “Sentimentality”inArguing About Art, ed. Alex Neil and Aaron Ridley, ( New York: McGraw Hill, 1995), p. 223. In essence, Savile’s complaint is that sentimentality is always false. He proposes that “ the sentimentalist achieves a certain gratification by f alse- colouring an object in his thoughts” ( p.225).
35https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeff_Koons.
36 Robert Hughes, “ Showbiz and the Art World,” The Guardian, 30 June 2004.
485
INDEX
Note: Italic page numbers refer to figures and page numbers followed by “n” denote endnotes.
Abadie, Daniel 125, 126
Abell, Catharine 9
Abramović, Marina 66–67
Absence and Difficult Knowledge in Contemporary Art Museums (Tali) 439, 445
absolute beauty 383
abstract: expressionism 293, 295, 296, 393; paintings 6–7, 377; visual art 290
Accademia delle Arti del Disegno 234
accessory ornaments 227Acconci, Vito 61–62, 63–64, 65–67
Ackerman, James 150, 151
acting space, structuring 241–244
action paintings 295–296
activated spectatorship 75
Adams, John C. 278
Adams, Robert 160
Addison, Joseph 112
adhesion 226–229
Adi Granth 291
aesthetic emotion 42, 143
aesthetic impulses 186
aestheticized racialization 302
aesthetic judgment: and erotic art 40–41
aesthetics 111, 191–192; modern 42–44
Aesthetics (Hegel) 132, 133
The Aesthetics of Mimesis: Ancient Texts and Modern Problems (Halliwell) 105
aesthetic surrogacy 34
After the End of Art (Danto) 418
Agnati, Luigi F. 190
Agnus Dei (de Zurbaran) 294–296
ahistoricist theories of comics 258
Ahmad, Adil Mustafa 46
Ajanta Caves 292
Alberti, Leon Battista 14, 98, 99, 159, 160, 229–230, 234
Alcestis (Euripides) 87
Alexander the Great 122
Alison, A. 380
All-American Men of War (Grandenetti) 259
Allegory of Painting (Cerrini) 334
allographic artform 257–258
The Ambassadors 6
ambient optic array 400
ambiguity of illusion 401
analogies 234–235
Analytical Philosophy of Action (Danto) 417
Analytical Philosophy of History (Danto) 417
Analytical Philosophy of Knowledge (Danto) 417
Andrei, Mary Anne 439
Annunciation (Leger) 296–297
Anscombe, Elizabeth 150
“anti-art” experiments 108
anti-erotic art 40antiquity 79–90
Apollinaire, Guillaume 248
Apollo and Daphne (Bernini) 169
appearances: realism as accuracy in representation of 167–169; realism as detail in representation of 167–169
Appia, Adolphe 243
appreciative judgments 200
architectural functionalism 231–232
architecture: analogies 234–235; beyond isolationism 234–235; coincidence/adhesion/reunion 226–229; confusions 234–235; functional integration 229–231; homology 234–235; modernist isolationism 231–233; and paintings 226–237; and sculpture 226–237
Aristotelian metaphysics 309–310
Aristotle 10, 81, 82, 86, 87, 88, 94, 101, 133, 185, 309–310; imitative arts 106; mimêsis 82–85
Aristotlean knowledge 222
Index
486
army-general-picture 389, 390
The Arnolfini Portrait (Van Eyck) 126
art 1–2; cognitive psychology and 203–204; criticism
176–178; end as historical phenomenon 130–132;
erotic in 39–40; formalist becoming of 233;
Greek 80, 86, 96, 226, 370; ideas, in Middle
Ages 94–102; issues 216–217; Kant on 117;
language and 344–346; non-figurative 290; nonrepresentational
290; nude in 39–40; objectivity
and 343–344; philosophical works of 309–320;
sexual in 39–40; and understanding 200–201;
Western 1, 21, 67, 98, 180, 297, 429, 476–477, 479
Art (Bell) 42
Art and Architecture in Italy 1600 to 1750
(Wittkower) 121
Art and Illusion (Gombrich) 9
Art and Its Objects (Wollheim) 26, 407–409
Artaud, Antonin 244
art behaviors 186; evolutionary explanations of
188–191; prehistoric 187–188
Art Criticism (Danto) 420
“Art Education-Education in Art” (Dewey) 440
artforms: allographic 257–258; autographic
257–258; one-stage 258; two-stage 258
Artforum 74
art history 123–125
articulation question 34
artifacts 209; cognitive 211; race 300
artificial polychromy 226
Artificiosa totius logices descriptio 309
The Art Instinct (Dutton) 43
Art in the Mind 65
artistically salient diagnostic features 202
artistic medium 60
The Artist Is Present 66
artists: art history made for and by 121–128;
intentions of 452–453; interventions into
museum philosophy 439; in Middle Ages 95
Art Journal 301
art museum: cultural heritage of 436–438; as
cultural mirror 435–449; and philosophers
440–443; philosophy 438–439, 443–445,
448–449; state of art 445–446
The Art of Sculpture (Read) 473
art performance 62
Art Rethought: The Social Practices of Art
(Wolterstorff) 108
Art since 1900. Modernism. Antimodernism.
Postmodernism (Krauss) 122
artworks: anthropomorphic 82; avant-garde 141,
143; as communicative devices 203; dance 283;
digital 52–53, 55–56; expressionist 198; print 33;
public 181; sculptural 21; three-dimensionality
in 21; visual 22, 25, 62, 89
art writers 121–123
As I Opened Fire (Lichtenstein) 259–260, 262
As Is When: A series of screen prints based on the life
and writings of Ludwig Wittgenstein 316
aspect seeing 317, 318
audience, and performance art 63–67
Austen, J. 408
authenticity 428–430
autographic artforms 257–258
avant-garde artworks 141, 143
Ayer, A. J. 407
Bacchus (Caravaggio) 8
Bacchus and Ariadne (Titian) 456
Back Pack 246n26
Balanchine, George 280
Baldovici, Jean 231
Banner, Fiona 60
Barnes, Albert C. 70, 440
Barnes Foundation Collection 70
Barney, Matthew 61
Barr, Alfred 438
basic print ontology 31
A Basket of Plums (Diderot) 364
Basset, Caroline 56
Batteux, Charles 116–117, 358, 381
de Bauchamont, Petit 437
Bauhaus 61–62, 145, 232
Baumgarten, Alexander Gottlieb 111
Baxandall, Michael 123, 125, 159, 473
Bayeaux Tapestry 259
Beal, Tandy 284
Beardsley, Monroe 43
beauty and sensual appeal 41
Beck, James 452
Beckman, Max 39, 479
The Bedroom (Van Gogh) 171
Beheading of John the Baptist (Caravaggio) 289
Bel, Jerome 282–283
Bell, Clive 42–43, 234, 474
Bell, Julian 121
Bellori, Giovanni Pietro 121–122
Belting, Hans 132
Bennett, Tony 439
Berekhat Ram figurine 187
Berenson, Bernhard 164n2
Berger, John 45
Berger, S. 310–311
Bergqvist, Anna 443
Berlyne, David 202
Bernini, Gian Lorenzo 114, 121, 167, 169, 475
Beuys, Joseph 18, 53
Beyond Art (Lopes) 108
The Birth of the Museum (Bennett) 439
The Birth of Tragedy (Nietzsche) 312
Bishop, Claire 71
black humanity 303
Blade II 258
Bladen, Ronald 235
Blam 259
Blinding of Sampson (Rembrandt) 392
Boccaccio, Giovanni 100, 323
Index
487
Bochner, M. 318
Bordwell, David 163
Bosse, A. 310–311
Boston Public Library 231
Boucher, François 351, 363The bowery in two inadequate descriptive systems (Rosler) 71
Brancusi, Constantin 69, 277
Brandi, Cesare 452
Brand, Peg Zeglin 29
Break Point (Banner) 60
Bredius, A. 425
Bresson, Robert 161
Brillo Box (Warhol) 122, 128, 136, 259, 316, 417
British Royal Collection 327
Broken Order (Goodman) 394
Broodthaers, Marcel 439
Brown, Trisha 280Brunelleschi, Filippo 99
Buddhavacana 291
Buddhism 291
Bullough, Edward 43
Burch, Noel 161
Burke, E. 302, 380, 384
Butin, H. 431
Byzantine art 97–98
Cage, John 62
The Calling of St. Matthew 150, 151
Cambon, Pierre 107
Capa, Robert 217
Capella, Martianus 94
Caravaggio 7, 8, 150–151, 289, 292–293, 345
The Cardplayers (Leger) 391
Card Playing War Cripples (Dix) 391Caro, Anthony 269, 272–273
Carpenter, Rhys 23
Carroll, Nöel 61–62, 108, 192, 200, 264–266, 267, 276, 281, 467, 471, 482n13
Carter, Curtis 19, 280Casi-Casa (Ek) 284
Catacombs of Rome 292
Cavell, Stanley 265, 268–271Cavendish, M. 310
Cave, Nick 71, 72Cave of the Heart (Noguchi) 284
cave paintings of Lascaux 1
Cennini, Cennino 99
“The Century of Louis the Great” 114
Cerrini, G. D. 334
Cezanne, Paul 122–123, 125–127
Cézanne/Pissarro, Johns/Rauschenberg. Comparative Studies on Intersubjectivity in Modern Art (Pissarro) 123
Chagall, M. 296
Chalmers, David 54
Chamberlain, John 480
Chaplin, Charlie 266, 274
Characteristics of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times (Cooper) 41
Chardin, Jean-Baptiste Simeon 361, 362, 363–364Charles I, King 333
Charles Schultz comics 257
Chatterjee, Anjan 190
Chauvet cave art 188
Cheval’s Ideal Palace 226Christian art 95
Christian Bible 290
Christianity 289, 290; martyrs and missionaries of 291
Christianized Neoplatonism 96
Christian theology 101
cinematic modernism 161
Clark, K. 45, 131
Clark, S. 307
Clark, T. J. 122
Classical Age 227
Claudel, Camille 40
Clement of Alexandria 79–81, 89–90
Clement VIII, Pope 324
Close, Chuck 5Cloud Gate (Kapoor) 138
cognitive artifacts: mediators as 211
cognitive gadget theory 190
cognitive psychology 196; and art 203–204; art and understanding 200–201; skepticisml about psychology of art 201–203
coincidence 226–229
collecting art 436
Collingwood, R. G. 43, 482n8
comic paintings 258–260
comics: ahistoricist theories of 258; painted 260–263; painting and 257–263
common perceptual mechanisms argument 197
The Complete Peanuts 1953–1954 257
compositional predicates 391
Compositions 1960 (Young) 65
conceptual art, and performance art 63–67
Concerning Famous Women (Boccaccio) 323
Concerning the Spiritual in Art (Kandinsky) 294
Confederate Monument Debate 466–468
configurational dimensions of paintings 6–7
confusions 234–235
conservation: defined 452; ethical issues 452–456; metaphysical issues 456–458
conventionalism 9–10
Conversions I, II, and III (Acconci) 65
convincing theory of truth 349
Cook, Roy T. 32–33
Cooper, Anthony Ashley 41
Copernican Revolution 470
Correspondance littéraire 357, 365
Costello, Diarmuid 220–221, 223, 271
Council of Nicea II 97
covertly erotic art 40
Craig, E. Gordon 243
Index
488
creation, notion of 101
critical race art history 301
critical race feminist aesthetics 302
critical race theory 301–302
criticism 300, 302–304, 365–366
Critique of Judgment (Kant) 40, 224
Critique of the Power of Judgment (Kant) 117
Crivelli, C. 292
Crucifixion (Tintoretto) 39
cultural evolutionary theory 190cultural heritage of art museum 436–438
Cunningham, Merce 284
Currie, Gregory 103, 187
Dadaist Tableaux-pièges 18
d’Alembert, Jean le Rond 116–117
Daley, Michael 452
Dali, Salvador 73
Danaë 45
dance: and philosophy 276–279; and visual arts 276–279
dance art 283–285; Hockey Seen as 279–283
d’Angiviller, Comte 437
Danto, Arthur 104, 122, 125–126, 131, 222, 224, 255, 316, 417–421, 435, 474, 477; After the End of Art 418; Analytical Philosophy of Action 417; Analytical Philosophy of History 417; Analytical Philosophy of Knowledge 417; Art Criticism 420; and art museum 442–443; The definition of art 417; and end of art 135–137; Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art 419; The philosophy of art history 418; Philosophy of Science: Readings 417The Transfiguration of the Commonplace 417; WhaPhilosophy Is 417
Darbel, Alain 226, 237
Davenport Memoirs (Wilson) 284
David, Jacques-Louis 122, 437
Davidson, D. 348
Davies, David 14, 30–33, 429, 432
Davies, Stephen 186, 283
da Vinci, Leonardo 289, 296, 338, 344, 345–346, 347, 351, 375
Davis, A. 302
Davis, Miles 250–251
Decorative Art Today (Le Corbusier) 232
The definition of art (Danto) 417
deflationary theories of truth 350
Delacroix, E. 213, 216, 478
Delaroche, Paul 130
della pittura (Alberti) 14
della Quercia, Jacopo 452
Dennett, Daniel 185
depiction 211–212
De Pictura (Alberti) 98, 99, 159, 234
De re ædificatoria (Alberti) 99, 234
Derrida, Jacques 50
Descartes, Rene 111
design 215–216
;
t
De statua (Alberti) 99, 234
deterioration: of paintings 456–457; of sculptures 456–457
Devereaux, Mary 466
Dewey, John 435; and art museum 440
Dickie, G. 418; Transfiguration of the Commonplace (Dickie) 418
Dickie, George 104, 196
Diderot, D. 116, 357–366; about materialism 360–361; about senses 360–361; approach to basic artistic notions 358–360; A Basket of Plums 364; on criticism 365–366; Discourse on Dramatic Poetry 362; magical experience 363–365; painting 361–363; semiotics 361–363; strategy on knowledge 357; theatre 361–363
digital art 49–56; interactive 52, 53, 56; materiality of 51–52; overview 49–51; and space 53–54
digital artworks 52–53, 55–56
digitalization 214
digital representation 57n3
digital technologies 246n28
direct registration 400
The Disasters of War (de Goya) 339, 343Discourse on Dramatic Poetry (Diderot) 362disinterestedness 41
dispassionate observation 344
displacement: Confederate Monument Debate 466–468
disquotational theory of truth 348
Dissanayake, Ellen 189
distinct arts with appreciative challenges 472–478
distraction 299–300
Divine Comedy (Dante) 101
Dix, O. 391
Docker, Richard 234
Dolce, Ludovico 100
Donnellan, Keith 153
Doubleday, John 170
Doyle, Conan 170
drawing 215–216
dual aspects of a painting 12–14
Du Bois, W.E.B. 299Duccio 98
Duchamp, Marcel 51, 73, 130, 480
Dürer, Albrecht 99–100, 102Dutch-Flemish painting 374
Dutton, Denis 43, 431
early modern European philosophy: ancient and modern painting and sculpture 114–115; classification of painting and sculpture 116–118; origins of painting and sculpture 112–114; of painting 111–118; of sculpture 111–118
early modern philosophical texts 310–312
Eastern Orthodoxy 289
Eaton, A. W. 46
Ecclesiastical Hierarchies (Pseudo-Dionysius) 96
The Effects of Good Government (Lorenzetti) 230
Index
489
Eisenstein, Sergei 159
Ek, Mats 284
The Elements of Drawing (Ruskin) 343
The Elephant Celebes (Ernst) 391
Elgin, Catherine 455Eliot, T.S. 250, 254
emancipation: of painting 232–233; of sculpture 232–233
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 107
Emile (Rousseau) 311
Emotional Embers 394
emotions see religious emotion
empirical aesthetics 161
Encyclopedia, or Systematic Dictionary of the Sciences 116
Encyclopédie (Diderot) 357
end of art 130–133; and Danto 135–137; sculpture after 137–138
“The End of Art” (Danto) 477
energy, defined 345
engineering knowledge 221–225
enlivened space 461, 463
entanglements 299–300
The Erl King (Weinbren and Friedman) 53
Ernst, M. 391
eros 43, 44
erotic: aesthetic disenfranchisement of 40–42; aesthetic rehabilitation of 44–45; in art 39–40; defined 39; vs. pornographic 45–46erotic art 39–40; and aesthetic judgment 40–41; covertly 40; Nehamas on 44; Scruton on 45
erroneously-misattributed Vermeer 428Essay on Painting (de Bauchamont) 437
Essays on Painting (Diderot) 363
Esthétique (Hegel) 226
ethics: and conservation 452–456; and restoration 452–456
Euripides 87
Eurocentric bias 157
evolution: explanations of art behaviors 188–191; and fine arts 185–192
excitement 294
exemplification 389; of certain properties 390; concept of 389; dilemma for 389–393; in Goodman’s theory 390; metaphorical 393; as property 390
experience of sculpture 464–465
explanation question 34
expression/expressionism 293, 389–396; representation from 389; semantic terms 391
The Expulsion of Heliodorus (Raphael) 164extensional adequacy 149
Falconet, Etienne Maurice 117
family resemblance 203
Fanon, Frantz 302
Farewell to An Idea. Episodes from a History of Modernism (Clark) 122
Fechner, Gustav 202
feelings 294, 295, 374, 411, 472; grief 294; heightened 294; implicitly religious 295; moral 383; negative 294; non-religious 295; psychic 295; religious 291; thought-free 295; uncanny 314; of uneasiness 294; see also emotions; excitement
Felibien, Andre 437
Felipe IV of Spain 170
Ferdinando Galli Bibiena, 245n14
fiction film 172
Fiedler, Konrad 233
figurative paintings 7, 13, 294
fine arts 103–109, 180; and aesthetics 106, 191–192; classifications 105; comparisons 104; of display 209–218; evolution and 185–192; evolutionary explanations of art behaviors 188–191; and imitative arts 105–106; methodological issues 185–187; and philosophy of art 191–192; prehistoric art behaviors 187–188; in 1830s 107
The Fine Arts Reduced to a Single Principle (Batteux) 116
First Papers of Surrealism 73
Fischer-Lichte, Erika 67
Flemish-Dutch painting 375
Flowers (Warhol) 30, 31, 33
Fodor, Jerry 224–225
Following Piece (Acconci) 61, 64
Fontana, Lucio 6, 334
forgery 6; authenticity and 428–430; defined 425–428; failures of 430–433; harms 431–432; integrity, failures of 430–431; philosophical discussion of 426; referential 425–426, 428–429; violations of rights or duties 432–433
formalist becoming of the arts 233
formalist theories of painting 11–12
Foster, H. 420
Foucault, M. 314–315
Fountain (Duchamp) 130
Four Books of the Proportions of the Human Bodies (Durer) 99–100
Four Honest Outlaws (Fried) 271
Fourth Range (Wittgenstein) 318–319
Frankenthaler, Helen 239
French Academy of Sciences 344
French Revolution 437
Freud, Lucien 14, 121
Friedman, Roberta 53
Fried, Michael 73–74, 264–265, 268, 270–271, 362
From Marx to Hegel (Lichtheim) 122
Fry, Roger 6, 233
function: and art criticism 176–178; determining 178–180
functional account of artistic form 200
functional art: determining function 178–180; function and art criticism 176–178; painting and sculpture as functional types 180–181
functional beauty 178
functional integration 229–231
Index
490
functional knowledge 221–225
“Future of Painting” (Clark) 131
Gabriel, Jacques 231
Gaiger, Jason 53
Garrard, Mary D. 334
Gates, H. L. 302, 304, 307
Gates, T. 307
Gauguin, P. 293, 425
Gaultier, L. 309
Gaussian-Quadratic (Noll) 49–51
Gehlhaar, Rolf 55
gendered template for painting 322–335; women painting/portraiture 322–324
Gendler, Tamar 479Genesis 101
Genoway, Hugh H. 439, 443Gentileschi, A. 333–335
Gerard, A. 380The German Ideology (Marx) 274
gesamtkunstwerk 243
Gestalt theory 161Giacometti, Alberto 480
Gian Battista Zelotti 230
Gibson, J. J. 399–402
Gilman, S. 305
Gilmore, Jonathan 151, 154Gilpin, W. 380
Godard, Jean-Luc 127
Goeree, Willem 160
Goldberg, Rose-Lee 60–61
Gold Rush 266, 269–270, 274
Gombrich, Ernst H. 9, 121, 128, 130–132, 211, 213, 296, 338, 342, 397–405, 452; Art and Illusion 397; debate with Gibson 399–402; illusion theory of depiction 404–405; The Image and the Eye 397; Meditations on a Hobby Horse 397; practices of picture 402–404; on representational art 398–399; The Story of Art 397
Goodman, Nelson 10, 25, 37n5, 151, 257–258, 277, 279–281, 343, 357, 389–396, 426–429, 435; activation of art works 441; and art museum 441–442; Languages of Art 389, 393, 426, 441; theory 393–395; theory of exemplification 389–396
Goring, H. 426
Gould, Stephen Jay 189
Gover, Karen 33
de Goya, F. 296, 338, 339, 341, 343, 351, 352, 352
Graham, Martha 284
Grand Duke Leopoldo 436
Grandenetti, Jerry 259
Gran Partita (Mozart) 408
Gray, Martha Armstrong 278
Greek art 80, 86, 96, 226, 370
Greek sculpture 113, 370–372, 376, 465
Greenberg, Clement 11–12, 62, 122, 135, 265, 267–268, 272–273, 274n2, 315–316, 414, 419
The Green Table (Jooss) 284
Griffith, P. J. 343
Grounds of Natural Philosophy (Cavendish) 310
Grovier, Kelly 125, 126
Guernica (Picasso) 254
GUI (guided user interface) software 50
hadith 289, 291
Hagberg, Garry L. 443
Halliwell, Stephen 105–106
handy graphic symbol 346
Hanson, Duane 477
Harnett, William 478
Harrison, Victoria S. 443
Harvard Summer School Dance Program 281
Harvey, Robert 257
Heath, Russ 259
Hebrew Scriptures 290
Hegel, G.W.F. 111, 122–125, 132–133, 226, 302, 461, 463, 465–466; and individual art forms 133–134; Lectures on Fine Art 367, 368; and plastic arts 134–135; on sculpture and painting 367–377
Heidegger, M. 313–314, 315
heightened feeling 294
Heine, Heinrich 107
Hein, Hilde 180, 435; and art museum 440–441
Heisenberg’s Principle (Beal) 284
Hejira of Islam 291
Hemings, S. 303
Heraclitus 80Herder, J.G. 461
Herder, Johann Gottfried 22, 113
Herschel, John 213
Hetzer, Theodor 232
Higgins, Ernie 278
Hildebrand, Adolf von 23
Hinduism 289, 291
Hirst, Damien 433, 463
Hobbes, Thomas 111, 310–311
Hockey Seen: A Nightmare in Three Periods and Sudden Death (Goodman) 277–278, 278–279; as dance art 279–283; lessons from 283–285
Hodgson, Derek 187
Hogarth, William 258
Hogh-Olesen, Henrik 186
Holloway, C. D. 301–302, 307
Holman Hunt, W. 289
Holy Trinity 230Homer 81, 249
homology 234–235
Homo sapiens 188, 215Hopkins, Robert 9, 13, 19, 25, 34–35, 464
Hughes, Robert 481
Hugues de Saint-Victor 94
Hume, David 111, 302, 357, 380, 384, 470–472, 481n6, 482n15
Hutcheson, F. 383
Index
491
Iconologia (Ripa) 322, 324–328, 325, 331–332, 335; Dutch version of 328–331; English version of 331–332
ideal sculpture 371
identification see religious identity
Ilaria del Carretto (della Quercia) 452Iliad (Homer) 81, 86, 249
Il libro dell’arte (Cennini) 99
illusionism 8–9
imagination: associative 384; contemplative 384; penetrative 384
imagistic meaning 250–255
Immersion (Piss Christ) (Serrano) 297I Modi 46
implicitly religious feeling 295
impressionism 293India, religion of 290
individual art forms 133–134inflection 13–14
installation art: defined 69; meaning of 70–72; and modernism 72–73; overview 69–70; self-sufficient art object 73–75
Institutional Theory of Art (Dickie) 418
integral restoration 453–456
intellectual celibacy 440
intensional adequacy 150
interactive digital art 52, 53, 56
International Surrealist Exhibition 73
The Invention of Art: A Cultural History (Shiner) 106
Irvin, Sherri 19–20, 25, 137, 429
Islam 289, 290–291
Islamic art 46
isolationism: beyond 234–235; homology, analogies, confusions 234–235; modernist 231–233
Istitutioni Harmoniche (Zarlino) 159
Jackson, Michael 464
James, Henry 107
James, W. 337, 349
Jaucourt, Louis de 117
Jefferson, T. 302–304, 307
Jegher, C. 328, 329, 330, 331, 332
Jewish religion 291
Johns, Jasper 127, 284, 317–318
Jooss, Kurt 284
J. Paul Getty Museum 435
Judaism 289, 290
Julie or the New Heloise (Rousseau) 311
Kabokov, Ilya 70–71
kalos 79
Kames, H. H. L. 380
Kandinsky, V. 438
Kandinsky, W. 294, 295–296
Kant, Immanuel 40–42, 111, 224–225, 267, 272, 274n2, 302, 310, 385, 470; on art 117; on sculpture 117–118
Kapoor, Anish 138, 426
Kaufman, Boris 161
Kelly, Ellsworth 127Kelly, Michael 26–27
Kemp, Gary 443
Kennedy, J. M. 361King, Alonzo 284
Kingdom Come 260, 262
Kivy, Peter 192Klee, Paul 160, 294–296
Kline, Franz 474
Knight, Cher Krause 444Knight, R. P. 380
knowledge: engineering 221–225; functional 221–225
Koed, Eric 20–22Kohn, Marek 187, 189
De Kooning, Willem 8, 125–126, 479, 483n30Koons, Jeff 481
Korsmeyer, Carolyn 429, 431, 432, 457Kosuth, J. 318
Kotarbinski, T. 349
Kovacs, Andras Balint 161Kracauer, Siegfried 214
Krauss, Rosalind 18–20, 53, 74, 108, 122, 137, 180
Kristeller, Paul Oscar 17, 104–105, 216Kulvicki, John 10
Kunne, W. 349
Kuspit, Donald 131
Lachaise, Gaston 480
Lamarque, Peter 471
The Lamb (Klee) 294–296
landscape painting 373, 375–376Langer, Susanne 24, 241, 461
Langton, Rae 46
language and art 344–346Languages of Art (Goodman) 257, 279, 389, 393, 426, 441
Laocoön (Lessing) 22, 315
La Pittura (Ripa) 322–335
Las Meninas (Velasquez) 314
Last Supper (Leonardo) 163, 289Laure of Paris (1863) 304–306
Lavallee, Zoey 46
Leclerc, G. L. 344Le Corbusier 232
Lectures on Fine Art (Hegel) 130
Lee, Robert E. 26, 466Leger, Fernand 235, 296–297, 391
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 111, 358
Leibowitz, Rene 135
Les Immatériaux 50, 54, 55
Les Pénétrables (Soto) 235
Lessing, A. 431
Lessing, Gotthold 22, 261, 315, 359
Leviathan (Hobbes) 310–311
Levinson, Jerrold 32, 39–40, 60, 425, 426, 457, 479
Index
492
LeWitt, Sol 6, 64
Lewontin, Richard C. 189–190
liberal arts 106Liberti, Giuseppe Di 104–105
Libri Carolini 97–98
Lichtenstein, Roy 259Lichthaus Luz (Docker) 234
Lichtheim, George 122
Light of the World (Holman Hunt) 289linguistic denotation 389
Linker, Kate 63, 65
Lippard, Lucy 55Lips of Thomas (Abramović) 67
List, Kurt 135
“literalist” art 73The Lives of the Modern Painters, Sculptors and Architects (Bellori) 122
Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, from Cimabue to Our Times (Vasari) 121
Livingston, Paisley 284Lizzies of the Field 266
locative-specific art 56
Locke, John 111logocentric theory of truth 349
Lomazzo, G. P. 330–331, 334
Lomazzo, Paolo 100London, Jack 12
Long, Richard 18, 20
Loos, Adolf 232Lopes, Dominic McIver 9, 108, 169, 279
Lorenzetti, Ambogio 230
Louis, Morris 474Louvre 370, 430–431, 437, 447
Lucie-Smith, Edward 18, 20
Lugones, M. 307Luminosity 66
Luxembourg Gallery 437
L’X (Bladen) 235
Lyotard, Jean-Francois 50
Maar, D. 337
MacKinnon, Catharine 46
Madonna of the Goldfinch (Raphael) 8
Madonna Rucellai (Duccio) 98
Mag Uidhir, Christy 28, 31–33
Mahayana Buddhism 291
major ornaments 227
Making Museums Matter (Weil) 439
Malevich, Kazamir 438
Manet, E. 304–307, 315–316mannerist paintings 292
map picture 270–274
Marden, Brice 127, 297
Margolis, J. 427
Marilyn Monroe (De Kooning) 8
Marin, Maguy 277
marking: and display 209–210; surfaces 209
Marshall, K. J. 307
Martin, F. David 23–24, 461, 463–464, 465, 468n1
Martyrdom of Saint Sebastian (Crivelli) 292
Marvel Comics 260
Marvels 260
Marx, Karl 274
materialism 360–361
Matthen, Mohan 43
Mayor, H. 346
McCloud, Scott 258–259
McDonnell, Patrick 260
McFee, Graham 276
McKay effect 198
mediators as cognitive artifacts 211
medium: artistic 60; giving up 265–266; and the map picture 270–274
Mental Floss 468n4
Merzbau (Schwitters) 73
Meskin, Aaron 32–33, 257, 258–259
de Messina, A. 296
metaphysics 457–458; conservation and restoration 456–458; and sculpture 25–26
Meurisse, M. 309
Michelangelo 277, 289, 328, 329–332, 334, 359, 372, 375, 452, 453, 455, 457, 462
Mickey Mouse 289
Middle Ages 227–228, 230; artists in 95; craftsmans/sculptors/painters in 95; ideas on art in 94–102; theater in 94
Miller, Geoffrey 189
mimêsis 82–85, 87; visual 83
mimetic accounts of painting 7–11; conventionalism 9–10; illusionism 8–9; resemblance 9; visual recognition 9
minimal theory of truth 349
Miracle des Ardents (Doyen) 360
Mirror of the World 121
Mitchell, W. J. T. 249
Mithen, Steven 187, 189
Moby Dick 32, 257‘mode’ 159
Modell, F. B. 243
modern aesthetics 42–44
modernism: and installation art 72–73; and sculpture 18–19
modernist art as philosophy 315–316
modernist isolationism 231–233
Modern Painters (Ruskin) 380–382, 384–385modern race 300
modest theory 349
Moholy-Nagy, Laszlo 160Molyneux problem 360
Mona Lisa 257
The Monster (Redon) 171, 174
Monument to Balzac (Rodin) 178, 413
Moore, Henry 181, 277, 476, 480
moral feelings 383
Morandi, G. 377
Morgan, Robert 131
Index
493
Morris, Mark 280
Morris, Robert 480
Moszynska, Anna 19
Mothersill, Mary 34
multiplicity and printmaking 30, 36
Munch, E. 293
Murrell, D. 305
museum see art museumMuseum Boijmans Van Beuningen 433
The Museum in Transition: A Philosophical Perspective (Hein) 440
Museum of Modern Art 438Museum Origins 439
Museums and Public Art 444
Muybridge, E. 344Myron 370, 465
Nabokov, Vladimir 122
Nadal, Marcos 190
Nanay, Bence 203
narrative representations, and realism 171–173
national treasures 131
naturalism 95, 98, 115, 233, 345
natural polychromy 226
Nauman, B. 317
negative feeling 294
Nehamas, Alexander 44–45
Nevelson, Louise 480
The New Testament 97, 230
New Theorists 219–221
“New Theory” 221, 223Newton, I. 223–224
The New Yorker 243, 259
Nietzsche, Friedrich 44, 247, 312–313, 315, 418
The Night (Beckmann) 39
Night Journey (Noguchi) 284
Nikolais, Alwin 284
Noble and Famous Women (Boccaccio) 323
Nochlin, L. 323
Noë, Alva 192, 196
Noguchi, Osamu 284
Noll, A. Michael 49–50
non-figurative art 290
non-religious feeling 295
non-representational art 290
non-representational sculpture 17
normative dimensions of appreciation argument 199
Notes on the State of Virginia (Jefferson) 302
Nussbaum, Martha 46
The Nutcracker 284
objectification 46
objective painting 372
objectivism 153
objectivity and art 343–344
object label 53
Obrist, Hans Ulrich 69
“Of the Standard of Taste” (Hume) 470
oil painting 374
Old Testament 96, 230
Olympia (Manet) 304, 305–306, 315
Olympian Jupiter 226
On Certainty (Wittgenstein) 318
On Criticism (Carroll) 471
one-stage artforms 258
Only a Promise of Happiness (Nehamas) 44
Ono, Yoko 65On the Genealogy of Morals (Nietzsche) 44
ontology 257–258
The Order of Things (Foucault) 314
organisms, and sculpture 24
original print 29
Ornament and Crime (Loos) 232
“Orthodox Theory” 221, 223outsider art 60
oxidation canvases 5
Ozymandius (Shelley) 460, 465
painted backdrops 244–245
painted comics 260–263
painterly aspirations in poetry 247–255
painting(s) 283–285; abstract 377; acting space, structuring 241–244; action 295–296; ancient and modern 114–115; and architecture 226–237; classification of 116–118; comic 257–263; death of and philosophy 135; defined 5–6; and deterioration and restoration 456–457; distinct arts with distinct challenges 472–478; dual aspect accounts 12–14; Dutch-Flemish 374; early modern European philosophy of 111–118; emancipation of 232–233; figurative 294; Flemish-Dutch 375; formalist theories of 11–12; fourth function of sets 241–244; as functional types 180–181; functions of sets 240–241; incorruptible 456; landscape 373, 375–376; location and sustained recognition 212–213; mannerist 292; mimetic accounts of 7–11; object as 5–6; oil 374; origins of 112–114; painted backdrops 244–245; philosophers use 312–315; philosophical approaches to 5–15; vs. printmaking 29; realism in 173–174; religious 374; representational 372–373; representational vs. configurational dimensions 6–7; restoration 456–457; Ruskin, J. on 380–387; taste for 470–481; and theater 238–245; truthfulness in 350–352; truth in 346–350; as two-dimensional 239–240
Painting as an Art (Wollheim) 408–409, 474
Pakes, Anna 276Paleotti, Gabriele 240
Paolozzi, E. 316–317
Parrhasius 9, 79
Patterns of Intention: on the Historical Explanation of Pictures (Baxandall) 122–123, 473
Pedagogisches Skitzenbuch (Klee) 160
Index
494
perceptual representation 168
performance art 59–67; vs. art performance 62; category of art 59–61; and conceptual art 63–67; defined historically 61–63; and performing arts 63–67; and role of audience 63–67
performing arts, and performance art 63–67
Perkins, Victor 264
permissive art ontology 31, 32
Perrault, Charles 104, 114
“Personal Taste and Artistic Worth” (Levinson) 479
Peruzzi, Baldassarre 238
pervasive suspicion 339, 345, 351
Pevsner, Nikolaus 234
Phidias 226, 370–372
Philip Golub Reclining (Sleigh) 44
Philip II of Macedonia 122
Philip IV of Spain in Brown and Silver (Velazquez) 452
Philips, Duncan 438
Phillips, T. 341
philosophical aesthetics 202
Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art (Danto) 419
Philosophical Investigations (Wittgenstein) 317, 318
philosophical skepticism 202
philosophical works of art 309–320; Aristotelian metaphysics 309–310; early modern philosophical texts 310–312; illustrating Wittgenstein 316–319; modernist art as philosophy 315–316; overview 309; paintings, philosophers use 312–315
philosophy: of art 191–192; art museum 438–439; and dance 276–279; and death of painting 135; and end-of-art 132–133; and visual arts 276–279
Philosophy and Museums: Essays on the Philosophy of Museums 443
The Philosophy of Literature (Lamarque) 471
philosophy of photography naturalized: engineering knowledge 221–225; functional knowledge 221–225; Roger Scruton and New Theorists 219–221
Philosophy of Science: Readings (Danto) 417
photography 213–214
“photography proper” 220–221
Picasso 123, 127, 254, 337, 352, 438, 452, 478
pictorial formalism 161
pictorial organization: combining scene and surface 162–164; overview 157–158; scene-first pictorial organization 159–160; scene vs. surface 158–159; surface-first pictorial organization 160–162
Pierce, T. 331–332
Pietà (Michelangelo) 289, 453, 455, 457, 462
Pieter Bruegel the Elder 348, 351
Pietersz, D. 328–331de Pigage, Nicholas 436
de Piles, Roger 437
Pinker, Steven 190Pippin, R. B. 367
Pissarro, Camille 123, 127
Pissarro, Joachim 123–125, 127–128
placement: Confederate Monument Debate 466–468; of sculpture 460–468, 464–465
plastic arts 1, 95, 130–138, 134–135
Plato 9, 43, 80, 81, 82, 86, 87, 88, 89, 96, 101, 185, 272; mimêsis 82–85
plausible theory of truth 338“Pleasures of the Imagination” 112
Pliny the Elder 9, 79, 323–324, 370
Plotinus 85–86, 96
Podro, Michael 13–14, 213
Poe, Edgar Allen 247
Poetics (Aristotle) 100poetry: imagistic meaning 250–255; painterly aspirations in 247–255; verbal images 248–250
political race 300
Pollock, Jackson 8, 62, 121, 135, 295–296, 316, 474
Polyclitus 370
Pope Innocent X (Velasquez) 395Pope Julius II 436
pornographic vs. erotic 45–46
Posner, Richard 39Potts, Alex 73, 480
Poussin, Nicolas 159, 478
pragmatist theory of truth 337Pratt, Bela 231, 257
Praxiteles 370
Predication of St Denis (Vien) 360
prehistoric art behaviors 187–188
Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot (d’Alembert) 116
preservation, defined 452
Price, U. 380
primitivism 151
The Principles of Art (Collingwood) 43
printmaking/prints 28–36, 37n1; art-instances 32; and multiplicity 30, 36; overview 28–30; vs. paintings 29; practicalities of 28–29; primary function of 33; vs. sculptures 29; as substitutes for original paintings 33–34
programing languages 57n2
Propped 126
Protesilaus 91n3
Protestant Reformation 289
Protrepticus pros Hellênas 80
Proximity Piece 63
Prum, Richard O. 185
psychic feeling 295
psychology of art 201–203Public Art: Thinking Museums Differently (Hein) 440
public nature of sculpture 26–27
Pygmalion 44
Pygmalion and Galatée (Salon) 361de Quincy, Quatremere 226
Quine, W.V.O. 346, 348–349, 351
Index
495
Rabbit/Duck (Wittgenstein) 318
race 300–301
race-aesthetics nexus 302, 304
racial difference 303
racial formations 302
Raimondi, Marcantonio 28, 46Rainer, Yvonne 62
Rainforest 284
Rake’s Progress (Hogarth) 258–259, 262“range anxiety” 222
Raphael 8, 164, 313, 358, 375
Rauschenberg, Robert 127, 284Rawson, Philip 212
Ray, Man 73
Read, Herbert 22–23, 461, 473
realism 1, 260–261, 292, 345; in narrative representations 171–173; overview 167; in painting 173–174; perceptual representation of appearances 167–169; representations of entitieof fantastical types 170–171; representations of non-existent particulars 170; in sculpture 173–174
realistic representations: of entities of fantastical types 170–171; of non-existent particulars 170
Redon, Odillon 171, 174
Red Square, White Letters (LeWitt) 6
referential forgery 425–426, 428–429
Reflections on Poetry (Baumgarten) 111
Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning (Wotton) 114–115
Reid, T. 380
relativism 153
religion 289–297; of India 290; overview 289; representation and resemblance 289–290; visual art and religious identity 295–297; visual art and religious life 290–291; visual expression and religious emotion 293–295; visual narrative and religious belief 291–293
religious: belief 291–293; censorship 297; emotio293–295; feeling 291; identity 295–297; painte292; painting 374, 376; sculptors 292
religious life 290–291; visual art and 290–291
Reliquary statue of Saint Foy de Conques 95
Renaissance 232Replacement Thesis 191
representation 289–290, 389; and resemblance 289–290; as so-and-so picture 390
representational: dimensions of paintings 6–7, 12; painting 372–373
reproductive print 34–35
Republic (Plato) 82–84, 132, 272
resemblance 9, 289–290; representation and 289–290
restoration: ethical issues 452–456; integral 453–456; metaphysical issues 456–458; of paintings 456–457; of sculptures 456–457
The Resurrection (Piero) 59
reunion 226–229
s
n
rs
Ribeiro, Anna 472
Richter, G. 433Riefenstahl, Leni 467
Riegl, Alois 162
Ripa, C. 322–335Robinson, Jenefer 153
The Rock where People Gather 51, 53, 56
Rodchenko, Alexander 438Rodin, Auguste 178, 180, 203, 413, 427Rodin, M. 427, 432
Rodriguez-Vidal, Joaquin 188
Roelofs, M. 299, 301–302, 307Rogers, L. R. 23Rokeby Venus (Velazquez) 44
“rolling shutter” effect 222–223Romano, Giulio 46
romantic art 134
Romanticism 293
A Rose Has No Teeth (Nauman) 317Rosler, Martha 71Ross, Alex 260–262
Ross, Stephanie 152Rotary Glass Plates (Precision Optics) (Duchamp) 51
Rothko Chapel 295
Rothko, Mark 293, 295, 474
Rouen Cathedral (Monet) 391
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 311–312Rubens, Peter Paul 126
Rumors of War (Wiley) 468
Rush, Michael 51
Ruskin, John 11, 229, 237, 343, 345, 380; and capitalist industry 387; Christianity of 381; conception of truth 380, 382, 385; Modern Painters 380–382, 384–385; on painting and sculpture 380–387; Ruskin, J. J. (father) 380; The Seven Lamps of Architecture 380, 385; The Stones of Venice 380–381, 386; valuation of expressions of freedom 387; view of art 381
Rutter, B. 367, 370
Ryman, Robert 8
Sagoff, Mark 429, 432, 454–455, 457
Saint Basil of Caesarea 97
Saint Francis of Assisi 228
Saint Thomas 94
Saito, Yuriko 458
Sakhai, E. 428, 429
Salviati, C. A. M. 324Sancho, I. 304
Savile, Anthony 457–458, 481
Saville, Jenny 126
scene pictorial organization 159–160; combining surface and 162–164; vs. surface pictorial organization 158–159
scepticism 339–343
Schapiro, M. 342, 343
Schier, Flint 9
Schjeldhal, Peter 123, 476
Index
496
Schopenhauer, Arthur 41–42
Schwitters, Kurt 73
Schyns, Phillipe 203
scientific racism 303Scott, David 453
Scotus, Duns 94, 310
The Scream (Munch) 293
Scruton, Roger 45, 219–221
Scully, Sean 123
The Sculptural Imagination (Potts) 480sculpture(s) 17–27, 283–285; abstract 372, 377; after end of art 137–138; ancient and modern 114–115; appreciation of 22–25; and architecture226–237; artistic practice and experience of 371, 372; Classical 376; classification of 116–118;defined 18–19; definitional projects 18–22; and deterioration and restoration 456–457; early modern European philosophy of 111–118; Egyptian 369, 371; emancipation of 232–233; experience of 464–465; as functional types 180–181; Greek 113, 370–372, 376, 465; Hegel on 367–377; incorruptible 456; Kant on 117–118;Martin on 23–24; metaphysical questions 25–26;and Modernism 18–19; non-representational 17; origins of 112–114; overview 17; vs. pictorial presentation 20–21; placement of 460–468, 464–465; Post-Greek 372; vs. printmaking 29; public nature of 26–27; realism in 173–174; representation 25; restoration 456–457; Ruskin on 380–387; senses of 89–90; and space 23–24, 462–464; supplantation of 376; taste for 470–481and touch 22–23; unlike 373; Vance on 23
;‘Sculpture in the Expanded Field’ 18Sculpture Now 19
Sculpture since 1945 (Lucie-Smith) 18Second Book of Architecture (Serlio) 238
Seedbed 63
seeing-in 13seeing truthfully 337–339
Segal, George 477
self-complete painting 372
Self-portrait (Dürer) 102
Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting (La Pittura)(Gentileschi) 333–335
Self- Portrait with Spectacles (Chardin) 352
self-referential symbol 392self-reposing painting 372
self-sufficient art object 73–75
Semmel, J. 335
Senie, Harriet F. 444
Sennet, Mack 266
senses 360–361
sensual appeal, and beauty 41
Serlio, Sebastiano 238
Serrano, A. 297
Serra, Richard 26, 465
sets: fourth function of 241–244; functions of 240–241; structuring the acting space 241–244
The Seven Lamps of Architecture (Ruskin) 229, 380, 385Seville, J. 335
Sex and Reason (Posner) 39
Sexton, Anne 249sexual feelings and desires 42
sexually themed art 40
Shaw, George Bernard 267Shelley, Percy Bysse 460, 465Sherman, Cindy 271
Shiner, L. 328
Shusterman, Richard 44Sibley, Frank 34Sikhism 291
Simonides 81
simple theory of style 154–155Sircello, Guy 40
Sistine Chapel ceiling 6
Sivin, Carole 278skeptical about psychology of art 201–203
Skeptical Thesis 192
Skov, Martin 190Sleigh, Silvia 44
Smith, David 480
Smithson, Robert 19so-and-so picture 389–390
social practice art 70
social race 300Socrates 82–83, 85, 89
somaesthetics 45
Soto (Jesus-Rafael) 235SOUND = SPACE 55
Southeastern Center for Contemporary Arts 297
space: acting, structuring 241–244; and digital art 53–54; enlivened 461, 463; as place 460–468; and sculpture 23–24; of sculpture 462–464; virtual 24
Spinoza, Baruch 111
Spiral Jetty (Smithson) 19
Spoerri, Daniel 18
Squeezing Minds from Stones (Overmann and Coolidge) 185
Staalmeesters 163
stain paintings 239
“The Starry Night” (Sexton) 249
Statesman (Plato) 85statuette of the Venus of Willendorf 1
Steinberg, L. 415
Steinberg, R. 345Steiner, Deborah 88
Stella, Frank 127
Stern, Gerd 278Stewart, D. 380
The Stones of Venice (Ruskin) 380–381, 386
The Stoning of Stephen (Ucello) 292The Story of Art (Gombrich) 121, 128
Strasbourg Cathedral 228street art 60
Index
497
Sturgis, Katharine 278style: determines style properties 153–154; genuine properties 150–151; individual and general 154; properties of 151–153; simple/complex properties 151; theory of style 149–150
stylistic yardstick 431
subjectivism 154
“sukashi shunga” (hidden shunga) 40
Summers, David 239–240
Summerspace 284
The Supper at Emmaus (van Meegeren) 425, 429–431, 433
Supplement Thesis 191
surface pictorial organization 160–162; combining scene and 162–164; vs. scene pictorial organization 158–159
Susini, G. F. 330
sustained recognition 212–213
Szymborska, Wislawa 249
tactile-visual sensory substitution (TVSS) 361
Tali, Margaret 439, 445
Tarski, A. 346, 348–349
taste: distinct arts with appreciative challenges 472–478; nature of 470–472; painting and sculpture 472–478; test cases 478–481
Temple, William 114–115
Tensile Involvement (Nikolais) 284
theater, and painting 238–245
Theophrastus 88
“theory construction” 223
This Too A Philosophy of History for the Formation of Humanity (Herder) 113
Thomas, M. 307, 335
thought-free feeling 295
The Thread of Life (Wollheim) 408
three-dimensional artworks 18–19
Three-Way Piece No.2 (Moore) 181
Three Women (Leger) 391
Tilted Arc (Serra) 26, 465, 476
Time and the virtues freed from evil and envy (Gian Battista Zelotti) 230
Titian 45, 305
Tolstoy, Leo 177, 482n8
touch and sculpture 22–23
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Wittgenstein) 317
The Transfiguration of the Commonplace (Danto) 417, 477
“Transparent Pictures” Walton 223
Trattato dell’arte de la pittura (Lomazzo) 100
Treatise on Painting (Alberti) 101Triangle of the Squinches (King) 284
Triumph of the Will 467trompe l’oeil 290
truth: convincing theory of 349; defined 337, 349; deflationary theories of 350; disquotational theory of 348; logocentric theory of 349; minimal theory of 349; modest theory 349; in painting 346–352; plausible theory of 338; pragmatist theory of 337; as value 350
Truth and Truthfulness (Williams) 339
truthfulness: defined 337–338; in painting 350–352Truth Unveiled by Time 167Turner, J. M. W. 380, 383
Twilight of the Idols (Nietzsche) 44“Two Monkeys by Brueghel” (Szymborska) 249
two-stage artforms 258type-token distinction 30typical beauty 384
Ucello, P. 292Uffizi Gallery 436
Umwelt (Marin) 277uncanny feeling 314
Until (Cave) 72
Upanishads 291
Van Camp, Julie 276Vance, Robert 23, 461, 462
van der Rohe, Mies 234
Van der Veken, Jef 454van de Wetering, Ernst 453
Van Eyck, Jan 126, 344
van Gogh, V. 171, 290, 293, 313, 453Van Laar, Timothy 33
van Meegeren, Han 425–426, 430–431
van Rijn, Rembrandt 339, 364, 385, 392, 425, 437Vasari, G. 121, 127
Vase de Fleurs (Gauguin) 425
Vatican Museum 436vehicular medium: paintings as 14; sculpture as 20
Venice Charter 457
Venus and Adonis 45Venus of Urbino (Titian) 45, 305
verbal images 248–250, 255n2
Vermeer 425–426, 428–430, 431, 433
Veronese, P. 385
Vertov, Dziga 161Vietnam Inc. (Griffith) 343Vigo, Jean 161
Villa Noailles (Mallet-Stevens) 231
violations of rights or duties 432–433Virgin Imad of Paderborn 95The Virgin in the Church (Van Eyck) 344
Vishnudharmottara Purana 158
Vision after the Sermon: Jacob Wrestling with the Angel (Gauguin) 293
visual arts 294, 295–297; abstract 290; complex 1; and dance 276–279; and Greek culture 81–82; non-mimetic tradition of ancient 86–87; and philosophy 276–279; Plotinus on 85–86; and religious life 290–291; signification of the invisible 87–89
visual artworks 22, 25, 62, 89
visual expression 293–295
visual narrative 291–293
Index
498
visual recognition 9
vital beauty 384
Vitruvius 227, 229–230Vygotsky, Lev 211
Wagner, Richard 243
Walker, K. 302, 420Wall, Jeff 271, 273
Walter Benjamin: The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction 50
Walton, Kendall 30, 172, 203, 211, 223, 224, 246n25, 260, 263
The Waltz (Claudel) 40
Warhol, Andy 5, 122, 128, 136, 259, 284, 316The Washing of the Feet (van Meegeren) 430
The Waste Land (Eliot) 254
Ways of Worldmaking (Goodman) 279, 391Wear and Tear (Back Pack) 244
Webb, Peter 39
Weil, Stephen E. 439Weinbren, Grahame 53
Weitz, Morris 203Well-Tempered Clavier (Bach) 426
Westerman, Jonah 62–63
Western art 1, 21, 46, 67, 98, 180, 297, 429, 476–477, 479
Western bias 157
Weston, Edward 217What Philosophy Is (Danto) 417
Wheatley, P. 303–304, 307
White Crucifixion (Chagall) 296
“white cube” gallery 70
Why Photography Matters as Art as Never Before (Fried) 264, 271
Wild Art (Pissarro and Carrier) 128
Wilderness to the Promised Land 291Wiley, Kehinde 468
Wilhelm, Jonathan 436
Willats, John 216
Williams, B. 339–340, 342, 345
Wilson, Dawn 220–221, 223
Wilson, Llory 284
Winckelmann, J. J. 112–113, 115, 233, 322, 370
Wittgenstein Illustrations (Bochner) 318
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 127, 196, 203, 316–319
Wittkower, Rudolf 121
Wolfe, T. 342
Wolfflin, Heinrich 152, 162, 164n3
Wollheim, Richard 5, 13, 26, 151, 154, 164, 405, 407–415, 456, 457, 474; Art and Its Objects 407–409; contributions to modernist art theory 414–415; on expression 409–412; ontology 407–408; Painting as an Art 408–409; on representation 409–412; theory of interpretation 412–414; on visual delight 409–412Wolterstorff, Nicholas 108–109
women painting/portraiture 322–324
Woolf, V. 350Wordsworth, William 252, 255
100 Works of Art that will Define Our Age (Grovier) 126
World Art History and its Objects (Carrier) 121The World as Will and Representation (Schopenhauer) 41
“The World is Too Much with Us” (Wordsworth) 252
The World Viewed (Cavell) 268–270Wotton, William 114
Writing About Visual Art (Carrier) 122
Xavier Le Roy (Bel) 282
Xenophanes 80, 82, 86
Xie He 158
The Yellow Christ (Gauguin) 293
Young, James O. 105
Young, La Monte 65Zarlino, Gioseffe 159
Zeuxis 9, 79, 85
Zimmermann, J. 324
Zuckert, Rachel 22, 462
de Zurbaran, F. 294–296